Voters League, is one. "We are supposed to be integrated," she says, "but it is integrated on the outside and segregated on the inside. From an educational standpoint, we feel we have some of the best teachers among Blacks, but they are limited. There are, for instance, no Black males teaching in the elementary schools, and it was not until this past year that we had a Black named principal of an elementary school."

Jenkins contends that there are discriminatory hiring practices affecting teachers and administrative personnel. "They are hiring Whites," she says, "but they find some excuse-such as they can't find Black specialists-not to hire Blacks."

Mobley defends the hiring practices in the system. "We have three Black assistant principals, as well as one Black elementary principal," he says. "We don't have any Blacks in supervisory positions at this time because we were overstaffed and we're not hiring any people."

A.Z. Young, a long-time Black activist in Bogaiusa, expresses views similar to those voiced by Jenkins. "We have physical integration," he declares, "but not mental integration. I'm afraid that is still a long way off."

Young says a pattern is developing in the school system: "When a Black is in charge of any activity, such as track coach, t1ric Whites don't participate." Furthermore, he says, too many young Blacks who graduate from the schools "wind up in the ghettos up North, or on skid row, or have to go into service. We aren't getting as many to go to college now as we did when we had Black schools."

Young worries about Bogalusa being "boxed in," culturally and economically: "We have no interstate highway, no airlines, no trains, and only two buses a day. The people who generally come here can't make it anywhere else in the world." From a Black standpoint, Crown Zellerbach has been a good employer and a positive force for racial justice-but it is gradually cutting back on employment.

Still, there is some optimism about the future of the school system. Iwo years ago, the voters passed a $4.5 million school bond issue to finance modernization and construction of school facilities. Superintendent Mobley says it is significant "that we had one of the few school bond issues to pass anywhere around this area in the past few years"

Mobley also asserts that the school system does not have "any real discipline problems now," as it has had in the past. "We have our share, but I don't think it is much different than schools all over the nation. This year, we feel we are having our best year. Each year has gotten a little better."

Shortly before last Christmas, there was an incident in which a White boy stabbed a Black boy. In the disturbance which followed, only a small number of students

became involved. The federal judge in whose court the Bogalusa school desegregation case has been handled was brought into the controversy to assure fairness in the settling of the incident by school officials. Most observers appeared not to see the affair as being racially oriented.

Blacks are still concerned that they have no representation on the elected school board, even though they have offered capable candidates in the past two elections. "The feeling was that it was time for a Black to be on the school board," says Al Hansen managing editor of the Bogalusa Dail - 1, News." But when Whites got to the polls, they just couldn't do it."

Moses, the Black radio station manager, got a very respectable vote last time, as did Murkel Sibley, a Black executive at Crown Zellerbach. But a majority of' the registered voters are White, and Blacks see that as an insurmountable obstacle as long as school board members are elected at large. A lawsuit is now on file in federal court to require that single-member districts be created for each of the five board posts.

Inside the schools, the two problem areas academically are reading and mathematics. Some classes are almost allBlack or all-White. In extra-curricular activities, the chorus is mostly Black, the band is mostly White, and the drama club is well mixed. Last year, a White boy and a Black girl had the leading roles in the school play. Whites and Blacks in the Bogalusa schools are still not entirely comfortable with one another, but the worst hostilities and inequalities of the past appear to have been reduced. W.F. Minor

New Orleans Tinies-Picajwne

Norfolk, Virginia: "For The Benefit of Everybody

When U.S. District Court Judge John A. MacKenzie declared on February 14, 1974, that the Norfolk school system was unitary and that "racial discrimination through official action has been eliminated," he shut the book on one of the longest school desegregation cases in the country.

For almost 19 years, the Norfolk School Board had been involved in litigation initiated by 101 Black parents and children who wanted an end to "separate but equal" education. The 1956 case bore the name of Leola Pearl Beckett, a Black seventh-grader who grew up without ever attending an undesegregated school.

Step by step over two decades, successive court orders forced the school board to desegregate its schools, to take positive steps to desegregate classrooms and faculties, to bus as a means of ending racial imbalance, to provide free transportation, and finally to pay legal fees to attorneys for the plaintiffs in the case.

In retrospect, many persons closely associated with the

Norfolk public schools say desegregation has gone fairly smoothly.

"It was unusually smooth when you compare it to other cities of our size and racial makeup," says John C. McLaulin, the assistant superintendent for research and planning. "Comparatively speaking, there were very few instances of violence and I can't remember any community-instigated incidents."

But the road the schools traveled between 1956 and 1974 was rocky at several points along the way. In September 1958, for instance, Governor J. Lindsay Almond, Jr., used the state's "massive resistance" laws to close six all-White junior and senior high schools and lock out 10,000 Norfolk students rather than allow 17 Blacks to enter the schools. After a federal judge ruled the anti-desegregation laws unconstitutional, the schools quietly desegregated in February of 1959, but half the members of the "Lost Class of '59" never finished their senior year.

Another sharp turn of events came in 1970 when the school system-again under court order-began busing students in an effort to increase desegregation. Vocal but nonviolent civic groups protested and threatened to boycott the opening of school. In the 15 months that followed, the school system lost 7,000-almost one-fourthof its White students.

In the first year of busing for desegregation purposes, approximately 11,000 students were transported. Now, the total is about 24,000, with the increase being made necessary by changes in the desegregation plan.

The decline in public school enrollment which followed the initiation of cross-town busing was accompanied by a sharp enrollment increase in the area's private schools, many of which sprang up as a direct result of desegregation. At the peak, an estimated 12,000 Norfolk children were attending the more than 50 private and parochial schools in Norfolk and the nearby cities of Virginia Beach, Portsmouth and Chesapeake, and the overwhelming majority of them were middle-class Whites.

But flight, sudden and severe when it began in the early i970s, has now tapered off. In the fall of 1973, school officials reported the return of 850 students from private and parochial schools, and the following year, another 1,000 reportedly returned. No accounting of returning students was,kept in 1975, but a school spokesman expressed the belief that enrollment is no longer seriously affected by White flight.

In the past 10 years, Norfolk's public school population has declined from about 55,500 in 1965 to 54,700 in 1970 and to 47,400 in 1975. At the same time, the percentage of Black students has increased-but not to the 70 or 75 percent level some predicted as a result of total desegregation. Black percentages went from about 40 in 1965 to 45 in 1970, and to 52 last fall. Between 1974 and 1975, the number and percentage of both Blacks and Whites in the'schools remained more or less unchanged. Between 40 and 45 percent of Norfolk's 300,000 citizens

are Black.

This year, Black-White ratios in the five senior high schools, 10 junior highs and 49 elementary schools are reasonably close to the 52-48 ratio for the system as a whole. Black percentages range from 22 to 69 in a few individual schools, but most are near the 50-60 mark. Some teachers, administrators and board members say, however, that the racial ratios don't tell the whole story.

"We've desegregated the schools," says the Rev. Joseph N. Green, Jr., one of two Blacks on the sevenmember school board, "but I do not feel we've integrated the schools. I think we've done a good job through busing of putting the races together physically. But integration means people are working together harmoniously and cooperatively. I don't think this has really come about. That which separated us in the past to a great extent is still present."

At the elementary level, children appear to work and play together without racial self-consciousness, but at the secondary level, social segregation is more apparent. "They sit in their little group and we sit in ours," shrugged one high school student. "Integration, it doesn't mean anything." Some say this self-segregation simply mirrors a society in which racial divisions remain deep. The distinctly racial character of most neighborhoods in and around Norfolk would seem to support that view.

In the desegregation process, most of the formerly allBlack schools have survived, and most of the Black principals have retained their position s-con trary to what has happened in many other parts of Virginia. In 1974-75, 26 of the city's 67 principals were Black-roughly the same as before desegregation. Only about one-third of the more than 900 secondary-school teachers were Black, however, and in the central administrative offices of the system, Blacks held only three of the top 15 or so positions, including one of the five assistant superintendent posts.

Blacks and Whites both are concerned about the disproportionate involvement of Black students in school disciplinary matters. Almost 80 percent of the students who were suspended and subject to expulsion in 1971-72 were Black, and in the years since then, that pattern has remained essentially unchanged. There are no simple explanations for those statistics, and no quick remedy to the problem appears likely.

Busing has been seen as the source of several problems in the schools. Some parents worry about kindergarten and primary students who are bused as much as eight miles across town. Some students say school spirit has been weakened because most of those who ride buses can't stay after school or come back at night for extracurricular activities. Busing is also said to be responsible for the decline of parental involvement in school activities and in parent-teacher associations. ,

In spite of the nagging problems, though, most of those who watch the schools closely appear to believe the advantages of desegregation outweigh the disadvantages.

They say children can now learn about each other and from each other, that all children now have equal access to materials, facilities and educational opportunities, and that all have benefitted from a strengthening of school programs to accommodate a diverse student population.

There is also evidence of academic improvement. Assistant superintendent Robert M. Forster, in comparing standardized achievement test scores from 1971 and 1973, noted an increase in the average reading score of Black students (from 74.4 to 81.9, on a national norm of 100) and also of White students (from 92.3 to 96.7).

Vincent J. Thomas, who was chairman of Norfolk's school board during much of the litigation and now is

chairman of the State Board of Education, credits Norfolk and other public school systems with having "far outdistanced any other public or private institution in creating and maintaining a truly integrated environment."

Lillian M. Brinkley, a Norfolk elementary school principal, acknowledges that the process has been painful at times, and that it isn't finished. But she adds: "I think all of us someday-we may be in our graves-will realize it has been for the benefit of everybody."

-Kay McGraw Norfolk Ledger-Star
