ALABAMA STATE UNIVERSITY: H NEWFEMOI~

By Randall Williams

MONTGOMERY -- At first glance, the case seemed straight out of the 1960's. A professor at an old Alabama university was in court charging that he had been fired because of his race. The college president said he had nothing against people of a different color, but that a way of life was being threatened. And Judge Frank M. Johnson, Jr., for at least the hundredth time, wrote an opinion thundering that the Constitution forbids hiring decisions based on race.

The ruling earlier this summer sounded familiar, but it was set apart by the races of the parties involved. Johnson ruled that Dr. Levi Watkins, the Black president of the predominantly Black Alabama State University, had engaged in a pattern and practice" of racial discrimination against Whites employed at the school. (Watkins denied discrimination; the ruling is being appealed.)

Though Blacks as well as Whites have complained about the way Watkins runs the school, and though Johnson carefully pointed out that "no doubt Blacks, as well as Whites, have fallen victim to Watkins's arbitrary actions," the case has been discussed in the same breath as Bakke. As in Bakke, however, it is unlikely that the ASU decision, as unprecedented as it is, will have many far-reaching effects. Johnson merely said again that public agencies cant hire and fire on the basis of race, and that should be already clear.

Still the decision did draw alarmed reactions from some Black educators who feared that the ruling might signal the beginning of the end of Black higher education as a distinct entity, at least in the public sector. On the other hand, some Montgomerjans are wondering if it doesn't simply perpetuate segregation to have a mostly Black university and a mostly White university (Auburn University at Montgomery) in the same city, both supported, no doubt at a great loss of fiscal efficiency, from the same state

 budget but with separate administrations.

In his ruling, Johnson was extremely critical of ASU, and he laid most of the blame directly on Watkins, calling him "an administrative tyrant who utilizes his power over the employment process to maintain a nearly dictatorial grip over the internal life of the university." In rebuttal, Watkins said he was only attempting 'to preserve Black identity' and that, anyway, 'the traditional White institutions discriminated, why shouldn't we?"

The curious rhetoric surrounding this case became such that people who knew Alabama during the Sixties half expected to hear Watkins suddenly denounce outside agitators; he did charge that Johnson's decision was influenced by a hostile local press and that some of the university's critics were "mysteriously motivated." State Rep Alvin Holmes, a feisty little Black man with the reputation of a gadfly, said Johnson's ruling represented "a dark day for Black people." Holmes, an ASU alumnus who is now on Watkins's payroll as a part-time instructor, also threatened to systematically sue "every college, junior college and trade school in Alabama" for discrimination against Blacks.

Other Watkins supporters issued a statement saying that Johnson's language toward Watkins was "unnecessary, inexcusable and unbecoming." The head of the local Black Democratic organization flatly said that discrimination against Whites was justifiable: 'Yes, when we put it in the total picture...

of Blacks being discriminated against in college, that makes it right.'

Within a few days after the ruling was announced, a petition began making the rounds of faculty offices at ASU. The petition stated that Watkins certainly was not a tyrant and that the signers knew of no discrimination against "Caucasians" at ASU. Authorship of the petition was universally denied on campus and the document itself disappeared after a local reporter picked up the story. But the issue further divided the ASU community. The petition appeared before contracts for the coming year had been signed, and the implications of the petition were clear. Whites who had legitimate gripes against Watkins would be agreeing that they had never been discriminated against if they signed, but they would be instantly on Watkins's enemies list if they didn't.

 Getting on Watkins's bad side is no small matter for Whrtesor Blacks at ASU. In the 15 years of Watkins's tenure, ASU has had 11 chief academic officers, eight basketball coaches, eight head librarians, six chief financial officers, and six football and track coaches. Academic programs at ASU have been in such constant upheaval that the school has changed, since 1971, from the quarter to the semester system and back again. Entire academic programs have been dismantled so quickly that a hapless student might suddenly find that the major toward which he had been working was no longer offered at ASU. In addition, the school has been on the Association of American University Professors (AAUP) censure list longer than any other institution in the nation, (Watkins says this is not his fault, but can be traced to the meddling in ASU affairs by former Gov. John Patterson, the man George Wallace claims "out-segged' him in the 1958 gubernatorial campaign.)

The lawsuit which created all the current furor at ASU was filed by Dr. Charles R. Craig, who charged that ASU's dismissal of several White instructors, including himself, had been "racially motivated. Craig, described by colleagues as competent but not brilliant, had been an English instructor at ASU for two years when he received, in 1973, a notice of non-renewal of his contract. Craig said he was 'numbed" by the notice, that his immediate supervisor was surprised when Craig told him about the notice, that race was the only possible reason for his firing, and that he was 'stonewalled" when he tried to find out more.

Craig said he began looking closely at school policies after getting his firing notice and saw a pattern emerging 'in which white teachers as a body were adversely affected in their progress toward tenure and inpay." This and other Watkins actions created a "psychologically chilling effect on the entire faculty," Craig said. The U.S. Equal Employment Commission found "reasonable cause' to believe racial discrimination existed in his case, so he filed suit in 1976.

Soon other professors began coming forth with their stories; many were witnesses in the hearings before Judge Johnson, Ann Davidson Patillo, a White voice instructor with a Master's Degree and three years of advanced study at Austria's Vienna Academy of Music, said she was told to leave quietly and cause no trouble after her second year at ASU, despite the fact that enrollments in her classes were steadily climbing and that she had gotten her
department accredited. Dr. Marianne C. Vos, a White assistant trench professor, said she had worked for seven and one-half years without a promotion.

Dr. Mary E. Settle, hired in 1974 as director of admissions, vas demoted to a nonadministrative position when she complained that she was passed over for several promotions which went to Black males even though she had more experience and was better qualified. Finally, after a meeting with Watkins, she was promised various jobs and pay raises, none of which materialized.

Dr. Paul Schaffer, a White assistant professor of English, was told that his request for the chairmanship of the education department or the deanship of the graduate school was denied because Watkins felt that alumni and the Black community wouldn't approve of a White person in that kind of administrative position. A similar reason was given by a Watkins assistant for the failure to hire a White basketball coach in 1974.

At that time, ASU had a new head basketball coach, Floyd Laisure, a Black man. Laisure had coached at another school with a White man named Anthony Rinaldi, and the two had worked well together. Laisure wanted Rinaldi as his assistant at ASU, but he was told by Dr. Tommy Frederick that 'the community is not ready for a White assistant--I don't think the president (Watkins) is ready-- the time is just not right."

Rinaldi was hired after all in 1977, after Craig had filed his lawsuit, but he and Laisure didn't get to work together very long because Laisure was fired a few months later for refusing to take the basketball. team on a 2,000 mile road trip in two vehicles described as "mini-vans." The team had to forfeit its scheduled games for that trip, but Laisure said the action was necessary because there was not room for the 20 large men who made up the team and staff to sit after the equipment was loaded. Laisure said he had had the same problem in other years, but had gotten no results from his complaints. Finally, he said, his obligation to the playersforcd his stand. This time he got results, and Rinaldi was also fired when he complained later that he was not elevated to

 the head coach's job for the duration of the season. ( Laisuru and Rinaldi have filed a $350,000 damage suit against ASU.)

For some alumni, the episode with the basketball team seemed to be the final straw. They formed an organization called the Coalition of Concerned Alumni and Friends of ASU and began attending meetings and calling for investigations. Meanwhile, Dr. J. Garrick Hardy, the senior ASU faculty member, had released a blistering statement in which he called for the trustees to study faculty unrest. Hardy was the first ASU graduate to receive a Master's Degree, from Iowa State, and the first to receive a Ph.D., from the University of Wisconsin; was a founder of the Alabama State Teachers Association, the black arm of the union-like organization which represents educators in Alabama; and had been a professor of sociology at ASU for 40 years.

ASU, Hardy said, "has deteriorated into the status of an academic dictatorship" subject to the "personal whims" of administrators who "are not carrying out the major function of operating ASU as it should be, but are spending too much time practicing vindictiveness, intimidation, discrimination, false accusation and harassment of faculty, staff and students." Hardy said job insecurity at ASU was the rule rather than the exception, and the resulting high turnover made planning of academic programs extremely difficult. Harcivsaid faculty morale was at its lowest point ever, and that the only persons whose jobs were safe were those personally liked by Watkins, whom he described as a "king on the throne."

Watkins met that rebellion by cutting Hardy's salary by $4,700 a year and by sending a letter to ASU alumni asking for "unity" and money, "as much as you can afford," to pay the legal bills for defending the school against "threats to its future." (Donors of $100 or more would have their names "beautifully displayed in university archives," Watkins promised.) Watkins said the threats "could be the beginning of the end for ASU as an autonomous university able to compete in the Montgomery area." ASU, he said, was "struggling to retain control of her destiny." Watkins then launched his own school newspaper, in which one
of the articles pointed out that the list of contributors was being carefully watched and that, so far, "four of the most vociferous critics" had not come forth. "It is unfortunate that these four good persons have so little faith in or loyalty to Alma Mater and concern or her future," the article stated

The vociferous tour and others noted that there was precisely the problem, that Watkins was unable to distinguish between his own destiny and that of the university, and was trying to defend his own shortcomings by making every attack on him look like an attack on the institution.

Not long after Hardy went public with his criticism, the trustees and Watkins met to study the problems, but the meeting was closed to the public and HardyWaS among those not admilled. Percy King, chairman of the Coalition of Concerned Alumni and Friends of ASU, held his own press conference at which he condemned excessive turnover in administrative and academic programs; lack of academic freedom; inequity in tenure; lack of effort to remove the AAUP censure; and drastic reductions in salary and/or position changes without prior notice and for questionable reasons. Three months later, the ASU General Alumni Association joined the call for a full investigation of ASU affairs.

Finally, two years after Craig filed suit, Johnson made his "reverse discrimination" ruling and scheduled hearings so he could listen to individual complaints from Whites who felt that they were denied employment at ASU or discriminated against in their employment at ASU on the basis of their race.

 Reactions to Johnson's ruling were sharply mixed. Watkins and his associates clearly saw the decision as a direct threat to themselves. Other Black leaders saw the ruling as another sign of the shift in the nation's mood, and in the judiciary, too, toward conservatism, a shift which often seems to be eroding hard-won advances made by Blacks during the past two decades.

But, said Charles Spears, an alumnus and a leader of the ASU Coalition," 'the same things that are happening to Whites (at ASU) are happening to Blacks as well. There are the same in

justices in hiring, firing, promotions and tenure policies." He said it is a mistake for Blacks to endorse Watkins's leadership "when that leadership is going against the things Black people fought so long to achieve. Now that the ASU administration has these things, they don't want Whites to have the same piivileges."

The general counsel of the national NAACP, Nathaniel A. Jones, Jr., made a similar statement: 'Black institutions must face the fact that they can't have it bott' ways. They have to adhere to the same laws and principles that apply to White state institutions." But Jones later modified his position, saying that while the NAACP is firmly opposed to segregation, the court

should have regard for the historic and u liquE, role of these institutions."

Montgomery lawyers who have followed the case believe that Watkinss appeal will be as futile as all of George Wallace's appeals of Johnson decisions have been down through the years. These lawyers also doubt that the ruling will have any effect on affirmative action programs Dr that the ruling sill pave the way for quotas for Whites at Black institutions.

The case primarily seenis to be another of those curious chapters in the history of Alabama politics, education and race relations, made even more noticeable by the reversal of the traditional roles of oppressed and oppressor. ASU today makes one think of an educational vaudeville, in which the main players this time are Black actors, all done up in whiteface,

Plaintiff Craig was represented before Judge Johnson by Howard Mandell and Delores Boyd. Mandell is White, Boyd is Black, and both lawyers devote significant time and creative effort to civil rights and poverty law issues. Since Craig won his case, Mandell and Boyd have endured criticism and abuse from segments of the Black community.

Mandell recently commented about the parallels between the reaction of the Black establishment to this case and the reaction of the White establishment to cases brought by Blacks in the Sixties.

'We've come full circle," he says.
