And Here I am

Beverly Carter, Spring, 1979, University of Mississippi

Here l am, my fourth and final year in college. I am proud too, and I feel that I have every right to be. You see my mother only made it to the sixth grade and my father to the seventh. What they gave me in book knowledge was not much, but what they gave me in inspiration was great.

I look back now and see my beginning. I see that small shabby house where I was born as Beverly. Diana Carter, January 27, 1957. I see my mother, Mae Bertha Carter, and my father, Matthew Carter. I see seven sisters and five brothers. I see the fields of cotton and soybeans that surrounded my house, and I see that old gravel road that toughened the bottom of my feet during the hot summer months. I see the cotton sacks I had to pull across my shoulder, and I hear my mother's voice. She is fussing at my older sister for not picking at least one-hundred pounds of cotton today.

I look back, but instead of smiling, Iwant to cry. It makes me sad to think about all the things that I and many others went through to get me to where lam today. lam wondering am I going to let all this slip away. My parents have done all they can to help me have the kind of life they wanted but never had. Now! am about to be on my own, and it will be my responsibility to demand an opportunity to get the most out of life that I possibly can.

I'm thinking about my first and second year of school. I attended Hunter Elementary School in Drew. In 1964 the federal government called for freedom of choice in the school systems. My parents decided to send me and my other sisters and brothers to the white schools in the town. I was in the third grade then and attended A. W. James Elementary. At that time, I did not know what an important decision my parents had made for me. It turned out to be a wise one. It taught me that wherever the better educational opportunities are, that is where I have to be.

 My mother told me when times get bad to keep repeating to myself, "I have a right to be here."

I was the only black child in my class and my sisters and brothers and I were the only blacks in the white school system. I remember howl hated recess. I would stand alone by a wall and wait for the bell to ring and recess to end. I wasn't allowed to play with my sister because she was in the fifth grade. The first, second and third grade played on one side of the school and the fourth through the sixth had the other side.

Kids would come by and call me names from nigger to walking tootsie roll. God, I wanted to cry, to disappear, to go home. I never cried, at least not until I was older. When I was in the fourth grade, my parents were forced to move off the plantation where we were living because they would not take us out of the schools. Gun shots were fired into our home. One of the bullets was fired over my sister's head.

We had nowhere to go. My mother and father had done nothing but farm all their lives and they were without a job. My parents had two alternatives: to pray for help from God, or to pull us out of the schools. They must have prayed, because out of nowhere, a lady from New York, who was a member of the American Friends Service Committee, showed up at my house. She said that she had heard about my family and offered any help we needed. She couldn't have come at a better time.

Now, as I look back, I realize that there must be a God somewhere. A man named Allen Black, disguised as a school teacher, purchased a house for us in his name. My father, after being told by the Mayor that he would never find a job in Drew as long as he (Mayor) was alive, soon found a job in Headstart.

When I was in the fifth grade, I did cry. We had just moved into the city limits of Drew, and I now had a chance to meet some black children my own age. Somehow they could not understand why I was going to an all white school. They said that I thought I was white. That hurt more than any of the bad names the white kids had called me, and I cried.

I am proud today because I look back, and I see that through it all, never once did I or my parents ever turn back no matter how bad times got. If you start something, you have to finish it, my mother would say.
