Cora Tucker (1938 1997)

On June 21, 1997, Cora Lee Mosley Tucker, a long-time community activist and educator from Halifax, Virginia, died.

Tucker led a life of tireless activism, most of which was devoted to challenging the long-established relation-ships of power in her home county in rural South Central Virginia.

"Cora was a major force in the conscience of Virginia politics," remembers University of Virginia professor Paul Gaston, who served with Ms. Tucker for many years on SRC's Executive Committee.
"Every com-
munity needs a
Cora Tucker,"
noted Parren J.
Mitchell,	the
former U.S. Repre-
sentative from
Maryland who
helped	launch
Tucker's career as
an activist in the
1970s by enrolling
her in a course on
community re-
search at Harvard.
"Cora Tucker has
been an indefati-
gable worker on
behalf of minori-
ties, the poor, and
the working poor."

Tucker lived in Halifax County all her life. She was born there in 1938. Her father, a Pullman conductor, died when she was three, leaving her mother with nine small children. To keep the family together, they all farmedsharecropped—tobacco and corn. When she was seven-teen, Cora married Clarence Tucker, a farmer, and together they raised seven children.

Although she devoted much of her time in the 1960s and early 70s to raising her children, she became increasingly involved in the civil rights movement, attending rallies and marches in Virginia and in Washington, DC.

Tucker said it was the treatment she received as a young child that made her "want to make some changes." Growing up black in Halifax County in the 1940s and '50s was "pure hell," she said.

"We caught heck growing up in Southside Virginia assharecroppers," she remembered in a 1992 interview. "I vowed then that I was going to learn about help for poor people and was going to tell everyone how to apply for help, where to apply, and would help them take on the racist class system that keeps poor and black people on their knees."

Tucker began making good on that vow in the 1970s.
Encouraged by Texas Congresswoman Barbara Jordan
whom she heard speak in Washington—and aided by
Rep. Mitchell, Tucker joined with friends and scores of
black students in Halifax County to form a grassroots organization called Citizens for a Bet-ter America. The group immediately began surprising and angering the entrenched white officials.
The group's first action—a campaign to build an integrated recreational center for youth—was followed by voter registration drives and surveys of the county's public and private minority employment nractic es CPA
filed successful formal complaints against the local governing bodies' spending of revenue sharing monies and against the school system's discriminatory hiring practices.

The group also criticized Halifax Democrats for being controlled by the same tight group of white men; that was borne out in 1979 when it was learned they had inadvertently re-elected a dead man to the local Democratic Committee. By 1981, when she was running as a write-in protest candidate for governor, a Tidewater Virginia reporter wrote that Tucker had "created waves like no black leader before her in rural Halifax County and the small city of South Boston." (For a portrait of Tucker's activist work, see the October/December 1985 issue of Southern Changes.)

By the mid-1980s, Cora Tucker and CBA had in-
volved themselves with a range of black community needs including paving roads, integrating the Agricultural Ex-tension Agency's Home Demonstration Clubs, and boycotting white-owned businesses to force them to hire more blacks. hl 1983, Tucker led SRC's Co-op Democracy Project in Halifax. The project challenged the all-white board of the Mecklenberg Electric Co-op, which had simply been re-electing themselves for years (see South-ern Changes, Fall/Winter 1996). Tucker also got involved in environmental issues when she formed a coalition to stop an uranium mine nuclear waste dump from opening. In 1986, Mother Jones magazine named Tucker one of the "10 Heroes of Hard Times."

Tucker remained a vital grassroots leader in the 1990s while accepting regional and national leadership positions including the chair of Grassroots Leadership, membership in the Black Leadership Roundtable, appointment to the Rules Committee of the Democratic Party, membership on SRC's Executive Committee, and membership on the board of directors for the Virginia NAACP and Civic Responsibility Southside Virginia. She also worked with the National Toxics Campaign and the National Black Women's Caucus. In these and many other organizations, Cora Tucker became a national speaker who gave lectures, classes, and workshops on grassroots leadership and community organizing.


Frank Parker (1940 1997)

Civil rights lawyer and voting rights advocate Frank R. Parker passed away on July 10, 1997, after suffering heart complications at Carilion Roanoke Memorial Hospital in Roanoke, Virginia. He was fifty-seven.

Parker worked for the hiwyer's Committee for Civil Rights Under Law for twenty-four years, in Mississippi and in Washington, serving for more than a decade as director of its Voting Rights Project. He brought redistricting lawsuits against multi-member state legislative districts which diluted black voting strength and foughtsuccessfully to deny federal tax exemption to segregated white academies across the South.

After leaving the Lawyers' Committee in 1993, he joined the faculty of the District of Columbia School of Law and then became visiting professor at Washington and Lee School of Law in Lexington, Virginia.

Parker leaves a lasting impact on Southern politics. Veteran Mississippi journalist Bill Minor once wrote that "Frank Parker had more influence on the flow of the state's governmental history in the 1970s than any single public official or group of officials elected by the people of Mississippi."

His book about the transformation of Mississippi politics, Black Votes Count. Political Empowerment in Mississippi After 1965 (University of North Carolina Press, 1990) won numerous awards.

"Through decades of toil, hardship, and brilliant legal advocacy, Frank secured the opportunity for black Mississippians to elect the first African Americans since Reconstruction to serve in the state legislature and in Mississippi's congressional delegation," said Lawyers' Committee Executive Director Barbara Arnwine. "The legal strategies he pioneered and the many redistricting battles he fought made minority political participation a reality at all levels of government across the nation." The Lawyers' Committee plans a memorial service honoring him in mid-September in Washington, D.C.	^
