BOOKS

Freedom's Light

I've Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom Struggle by Charles M. Payne (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995, 525 pages).

Reviewed by Jacqueline Rouse

Jacqueline Rouse is associate professor of history at Georgia State University. She is author of Lugenia Burns Hope: Southern Reformer, published by University of Georgia Press, 1989, anda contributing author to Black Women in America: An Historical Encyclopedia.

In grasping the tradition of organizing in the state of Mississippi during the decade of the sixties, Charles Payne seeks to analyze two components: how a large group of people "who were historically dependent, mostly apolitical, and vulnerable to violence," were moved to become activists in changing the conditions in their lives. And, how a new generation of young civil rights workers became carriers of the tradition of organizing in rural Mississippi. Payne forces us into the deep piney woods and hilly terrains of southern Mississippi, in order for us to appreciate the longevity of resistance by a cadre of undaunted "race" men and women. By acknowledging these new "movement centers," he provides an essential link in the evolving historiography of the modern civil rights movement.

Drive-by shootings, firebombs, rattlesnakes thrown onto front porches, homes and crowds shot into, cars forced from rural and state roads—the "horrific terror of the system of Jim Crow" in Mississippi. Payne pulls us into the thicket of terrorism in order to release us into the safety of strong local independent leadership. Furious and free from economic reprisals from the local whites, these independent farmers, self-employed veterans, Pull-man porters, entrepreneurs, and a few private professionals, organized community leagues, councils, and youth chapters of the NAACP.

In the sixties the community organizing witnessed the arrival of young idealistic workers like Bob Moses, James Lawson, Lawrence Guyot, and Hollis Watkins. Via written introductions, Vernon Dahmer, Amzie Moore, C.C. Bryant, E.W. Steptoe and others adopted, nurtured, groomed, and when appropriate, introduced these fresh voices to their neighbors and friends. Intrigued by the new declarations about their "rights," the elderly and teenagers offered themselves to test the limits of repression. Nightly rallies served to encourage and inspire. Faith in "simple justice and common decency" was re-enforced by testimonies, prayers, and spirituals.

Still many African American Mississippians would become committed to "dat mess" only after the arrest or attack on a relative, neighbor, friend, or leader. Mothers joined after teenagers were expelled from schools or arrested for protesting. Brutal murders often increased the number of local activists. Southern white racists be-
