On January 24, 1997, John A. Griffin, n, a charter member of the Southern Regional Council, died. Born in Mon-roe, Georgia, Griffin moved to Atlanta as a child. He worked at Georgia Tech, Emory, and Florida State University before going to Washington, D. C. in 1964 to assist former Florida Governor Leroy Collins at the Community Relations Service. Griffin mediated racial conflicts in Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. He served as director of the Southern Education Foundation from 1965 to 1978. A quiet man who never grabbed headlines, John Griffin en-gaged the South's problems and promise in his life and work.
Griffin's work for civil rights spanned nearly seven decades. He recalled his early years in interviews cone '-cted by Cliff Kuhn for WRFC Radio (1979,
1986), by George King (1996), and
Kathleen Downey (1987), all edited here
by Cliff Kuhn.

I grew up with segregation ideas and
white supremacy ideas. There was a big
fire in Atlanta in 1917, that started over
about Edgewood Avenue and swept to-
ward Ponce de Leon, just galloping along.
My father rescued my mother and me
from a residence on Boulevard. We es-
caped with nothing. As a little boy of
about five years old, I got hungry. My
father took me over into a black commu-
nitv and knocked on some doors_ and
said, "My little boy here is hungry. Could you give him something to eat?" And at one house, a member of the family went back to their kitchen, and brought out a roll. I didn't eat that roll because I thought it might be dirty coming from a black home.

Griffin's attitudes on race began to change when he niet sociologist Arthur Raper, research director for the Commission on Interracial Cooperation, forerunner of the SRC.

Around 1930, it was very difficult to get a summer job. I heard that there might be one at the Commission on Interracial Cooperation, and I went down to inquire about it and met Arthur Raper. For me, the encounter with Raper was a unique experience. He was a good friend of Walter Chivers, a professor at Morehouse College. I was a little bit shocked by it. I had grown up in a family that had pretty good sympathies on race, but they didn't eat with black folks and they didn't go to their houses. And here was Arthur Raper doing these things naturally.

After graduating from Atlanta's Boys High School in1931, Griffin went to Emory University, where he attended student interracial meetings.

A handful of students, sometimes because of their participation in religious organizations, had started to think about race. At these meetings, black and white students had opportunities for getting acquainted. Most white middle-class youths growing up in the South in the 1930s saw very few black people who were their peers. They came in touch with black people who were cast in menial roles,working in the house or working in the yard. So it was a very unusual experience for a white kid in a Southern college to get acquainted with a black kid who was just as smart as he was and knew just as much as he
did, and maybe had a better education
than he had. I can remember being
uncomfortable and cautious about it,
because it was out of the ordinary.

By the time I'd graduated, some of
the views I had picked up were cer-
tainly not conventional ones.

Later, Griffin taught English at Georgia Tech.

A faculty person in the Thirties who dared to take a position of wanting to do something about the black community, for example, was subject to all kinds of criticism.

Starting about 1938, I was running a radio program, the "Georgia Tech Radio Roundtable." This program ran for seven or eight years. I believe that the first time the distinguished black sociologist W.E.B. DuBois had access to a radio audience in Atlanta was on that program. I remember the very impressive person that Dr. DuBois was. I got reprimanded for it by the president of the university.

As Griffin recalls, the roots of the modern civil rights movement go back well before the Montgomery bus boycott or the Brown decision.

Certainly World War II was important to the modifying of racial attitudes. The fact that we were fighting as a democratic force against Naziism was inconsistent with practices that had been going on this part of the country for a long, long time. Because these democratic ideas had been given an airing, that made it easier for a group like the Southern Regional Council to reach out and not be run out of town.	^
