Massive Electrical Resistance:
The Struggle for Democracy at
Mecklenburg Co-op
By Henry Leifermann and Preston Quesenberry
For well over a decade, Cora Tucker, a civil rights activist and founder of the grassroots organization Citizens for a Better America, has been working to get African-American candidates democratically elected to the board of directors of the Mecklenburg Electric Co-op in Virginia, located on the North Carolina state line near I-95. African-American members have never elected one of their own candidates to the co-op board, despite making up more than a third of Mecklenburg's customers, says Tucker.
Currently, two of Mecklenburg's eleven board members are African American,
but African-American communities did not nominate either of them as candidates, Tucker says. In order to get people on the board who are selected by and accountable to local communities, Tucker and her supporters have been mailing out letters to all of the black churches in the service area, alerting their leaders to the upcoming board election in June of 1997 and asking them to consider whether they or anyone else in their
congregations might be interested in running. The letter also informs them about the board's responsibilities and about the resources it controls.
"People don't understand what the board does," Tucker says. "The board decides who gets the grants and who gets the loans. If we could get someone elected at least we could know what's going on. We'd know what money is available, and how we can apply for these funds. There's a lot of things we could get done if we worked together."
If the letter-writing effort succeeds in initiating a grassroots reform campaign, Tucker believes candidates will face formidable obstacles to actually being elected. One of the most persistent barriers to fair representationis the election system itself; although candidates run as representatives of separate districts within the co-op service area, each voter is allowed to cast a ballot for every district. Although eliminated in most governmental elections because it discriminates against black populations by diluting the effects of their votes, this "post-at-large" system of voting is still common in many co-ops.
Tucker notes that even getting the names of their candidates on the write-in ballots that Mecklenburg mails out to its customers will prove a difficult task. Four or five months before its June annual meeting, Mecklenburg will mail out ballots with the names of candidates already printed on them, and Tucker and her supporters have yet
to figure out how to get their own candidates' names on these ballots. "We've tried and tried," she says. "We've called and written them letters, saying `Look, we would like to have some input before you print the ballots.' They never wrote back or called back, and they just keep sending out these ballots with names al-ready printed on them."
At least now the Mecklenburg board of directors "goes through the motions" of holding a democratic
election through mail-in ballots, Tucker says. For years, board members simply re-elected themselves at their annual meetings or violated co-op bylaws by electing their chosen candidates though the use of large numbers of proxy votes — ballots gathered from members who often were uninterested in who controlled their co-op.
The 1983 Campaign: Democracy Postponed
Local African-American leaders first challenged this use of proxy votes in 1983. With support from the Co-op Democracy Project, three black men ran for election to the board that year, while Tucker and other community organizers arranged to show up at the annual meeting with enough supporters to vote the reform candidates
into office. Five days before the meeting, however, the co-op board realized its intention to vote more than seven thousand proxies would probably be challenged. The co-op manager and his staff worked through the weekend before the Tuesday election, phoning and visiting members to get them to attend the annual meeting in person.
The meeting was scheduled to begin at 6:00 p.m. By 5:30, a mile-long line of automobiles carrying white co-op supporters stretched in front of the co-op offices. By eight o'clock, when voting began, more than twenty-five hundred co-op members were in attendance. News reports observed that not even the local football games had attracted such a sizable crowd of local residents in recent history. The opposition candidates and their supporters were overwhelmed. After the election, Tucker returned to her rural home around midnight to discover someone had broken in and soaked her bed with heating oil while she was gone.
Three weeks later, Dr. Curtis W. Harris of Hopewell, president of the Virginia chapter of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, held a news conference and called for a state investigation of the Mecklenburg election. In a statement, Harris observed that control andaccountability were the election's central issues: "A group of members became concerned that low-income residential users of all races were subsidizing the electric bills of large dairy farmers and mechanized tobacco farmers using lots of irrigation and electricity." Harris said that at that time, forty-three percent of the co-op's customer-members were black, but the Democracy Project could not reach many of those potential voters to seek their participation in the election, because co-op management charged $500 for a copy of its list of members.
After the loss in the 1983 election, "people were so devastated that it was hard to get them to turn out at meetings," says Tucker. Even if members could have been rallied, the board has changed its procedures so that showing up at annual meetings has become an ineffectual strategy for electing new directors. Largely be-cause of the challenge to incumbents in the 1983 election and Harris's subsequent call for a state investigation, the Mecklenburg board began mailing out ballots to its members. Now, by the time members show up at the June annual meeting to nominate their own candidate, "everybody's already gotten their ballots in the mail and sent them back," Tucker says. ^
A Different Type
of Development
It took a coalition of whites and blacks to win the only election victory at a local utility co-op during the original Co-op Democracy Project efforts in 1983. Working together, the reform coalition successfully elected five new candidates to the board of directors of the Dixie Electric Membership Cooperative in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. What has happened since that victory serves as an example of both the opportunities offered by cooperatives and the difficulties in maintaining full democratic participation.
Coalition and Change
Dixie EMC serves parishes circling the metropolitan Baton Rouge area, including both suburban and rural areas. Dixie's suburban customer-members are a largely white population, while the rural areas are populated mostly by African Americans, who currently make up about a third of Dixie's members.
In mid-February 1983, the Dixie campaign began with the usual meeting to inform local activists and community leaders about the Co-op Democracy Project and to enlist their support in the upcoming effort. Participants included representatives from the Louisiana Legislative Black Caucus, the Southern Cooperative Development Fund, and the Louisiana Hunger Coalition, along with a number of welfare rights activists.
Unknown to Project organizers, another group al-ready had formed in hopes of changing the membership of Dixie's board of directors. Its members — almost all white and residents of the Baton Rouge suburbs — had adopted the name "Dixie Watch." Staff from the Co-op Democracy Project began meeting with representatives from Dixie Watch, and a loose coalition developed. Time was short because Dixie EMC's board of directors election was scheduled for late April, two months away.
The Co-op Democracy-Dixie Watch coalition had one other rarity working in its favor. Unlike almost all other Black Belt co-ops, Dixie EMC's election procedure was simple and direct. It took signatures from one per-cent of the customer-members (or about 450 members at that time) to nominate a candidate for the board. Voting was done by mail, and the infamous use, usually misuse, of voting by proxy was not allowed, meaning the incumbent board could not re-elect itself simply by gathering proxies from hundreds of disinterested customers and co-op members. Finally, the directors were elected by district, and not through at-large voting.
Dixie Watch agreed that its voters would supportHeadquarters of Dixie EMC in Baton Rouge.
two candidates backed by the Co-op Democracy Project in election districts where some of its mostly white supporters lived. In return, the predominantly black Co-op Democracy Project participants agreed to support three Dixie Watch candidates in districts where they lived. When the votes were counted, all five new candidates backed by the coalition were elected to the board of directors of Dixie EMC.
At the first meeting of the Dixie board following the elections, two incumbent board members resigned. They were replaced by an additional two new directors, and the seven new members of the Dixie EMC board totalled a majority. To symbolize the change, the new board officially changed their co-op's name from Dixie EMC to DEMCO in 1984.
"Quiet" Aftermath
Presently, four of the candidates elected in 1983 are still serving on DEMCO's board; of its thirteen members, eleven are white and two are black.
Each year between 1985 and 1989, anywhere from two to five new candidates ran against incumbent DEMCO board members, and one to two new members were elected each of these years with the exception of 1989. A quorum was not reached, however, in any of the elections between 1985 and 1988, since DEMCO's bylaws require fifteen percent of the co-op's members to mail in ballots for a quorum and an average of only 12.5 percent of members did so. Still, because a quorum was reached in the candidates' specific districts, the elections of the new board members were valid.
In the 1990s, things have been even more "quiet," according to DEMCO's head of marketing, Mark Bonner. Incumbents have not been challenged and quorums have
generally not been reached. After a quorum of 18.6 per-cent of the members mailed in ballots in 1990, an average of only 7.6 percent of members mailed in their ballots over the next five years. While the number of mail-in ballots has been unimpressive, the turn-out at DEMCO's annual meetings has been far worse: in the 1990s, less than two members on average have showed up at annual meetings.
Eugene Traylor, one of the five reform candidates elected in 1983 and president of the DEMCO board since 1990, admits the new management has not been able to bring about a marked increase in democratic involvement, but says it has attempted to do so by changing the co-op's bylaws. Although Dixie's election procedure was already simple and direct relative to most co-ops, DEMCO's new board of directors made it even simpler. Before 1984, for example, candidates needed to get signatures from one percent of the members to get their names on the ballot; because of
bylaw changes made by the new board only fifty signatures are required now. In addition, candidates in 1983 could be validly elected from their district only if their was a quorum in every district, including their own. Since 1985, candidates have only needed a quorum in their own districts. Finally, in the interests of gender equity, new bylaws clarify that both husband and wife are members who can	cast	their
household's one vote, while previously each household could have only one member as well as one vote.
Traylor says the board has also been able to come through on its central campaign promise — lower rates. DEMCO's residential customers saw their rates fall from 10.5 cents per kilowatt-hour to just under eight cents.
Incubator for Development
Traylor also included economic development initiatives among his list of the board's accomplishments. In 1992, DEMCO secured a $100,000 zero-interest loan from the RUS's loan and grant program to help a hospital furniture company based in St. Helena Parish expand its operations, creating ten jobs in the process. A fire truck assembly company based in Baton Rouge also needed toexpand its operations and was planning to relocate out of state; instead, a $400,000 no-interest RUS loan secured by DEMCO encouraged Ferrara Fire Apparatus Company to relocate to the tiny Louisiana town of Holden (population 500). The company transferred seventy-five employees from its old site and hired seventy-five new ones from Holden and the surrounding area.
DEMCO is not particularly extraordinary among co-ops in the extent to which it has taken advantage of RUS loans and grants, nor in many of the specific ways it has used them. More unique is DEMCO's Dixie Business Development Center (DBDC). The center is one of only about 500 to 600 such "business incubators" in the country, very few of which are sponsored by utilities and fewer still by co-ops. In Louisiana, only one other co-op (South-west Louisiana in Lafayette) sponsors a business incubator and no investor-owned utilities sponsor one.
DEMCO started its own incubator in 1993, after it
moved from its former
facility. Now, the utility's
former facility is avail-
able for office, manu-
facturing, and ware-
house space. Tenants in
the center receive flex-
ible leases, utilities, sec-
retarial services, janito-
rial services, tele-
phones, copiers, data
and word processing,
and marketing, busi-
ness, and financial coun-
seling. After anywhere
from six to thirty-six
months, tenants are ex-
pected to "graduate"
into private sector facili-
ties. The center also helps aspiring entrepreneurs set up businesses in other locations, by providing them with financial counseling and helping them secure bank loans.
In all, DBDC has helped thirty-six entrepreneurs to start up businesses, which, in turn, have generated 256 new jobs. Sixteen of these businesses are currently located at the actual development center in Livingston Parish, while the other twenty are spread throughout six parishes in Louisiana and one county in Mississippi. Three of these businesses are owned by women and another three are owned by African Americans.
Aspiring entrepreneurs throughout the state hear about the incubator largely through an A.M. talk radio show called "Spotlight on Business," hosted by DBDC executive director Bob Fouchard. The show attracts hun-
dreds of Fouchard's listeners to his center each year.
Fouchard says he gives priority in the competition for DBDC space and services to those who have firm financial backing, some prior business experience, and a workable plan. "We go through a pretty good pre-screening process," Fouchard said. "About ninety percent of the people who come in here don't qualify to start up a new business, largely because they don't have any money and they want someone to loan them a bunch of money. We're trying to help people go into business who are logical to go into business."
Recently, the RUS has approved a $400,000 grant (which DEMCO will match with $80,000) for the expansion of the DBDC — the first-ever RUS loan for a business incubator.
Rural Economic Potential
By providing the support services and counseling for some local residents to become entrepreneurs, incubators like the Dixie Business Development Center may represent a better strategy for rural economic development than more traditional strategies of industrial recruitment. With entrepreneurship, economic development is done by rural residents (if only a handful) rather than to them by outside developers who receive a generous package of "incentives" (tax credits, no-interest loans, free land) and a disproportionate share of the benefits. But, as Fouchard's comments indicate, incubators can only help a small minority of the rural South's residents — those who already have a significant amount of capital to invest in their own business.
In addition, there are no guarantees that the average seven to eight workers employed by the incubator's local entrepreneurs will have more democratic control over their work environments than employees of transplanted businesses. Nor can one assume they will receive higher wages that provide an adequate family income. Finally, there is no guarantee that the businesses "graduating" from the business incubator — which will be run first and foremost in the interest of private profits — will necessarily work in the interests of the larger community of DEMCO's customers-members who are helping to subsidize the DBDC.
If DEMCO's members were to become more actively involved in their co-op, however, a different type of rural economic development might be possible — a type democratically controlled and specifically designed to serve the community's needs as its members see them.

— H.L. ANI) P.O.
