The Engaged Observer
Rob Amberg and Earl Dotter

Editor's note: In the following pages Southern Changes features the work of two excellent and widely recognized contemporary social photographers — Rob Amberg and Earl Dotter — accompanied by brief autobiographical comments and discussion of photographic strategies. Amberg's pictures have appeared regularly in Southern Changes, providing complement and counterpoint to a number of writers' essays. Here we join his words to a selection of photos drawn from projects he has undertaken working from his base in Madison County, North Carolina. For years, Earl Dotter, one of the most well-known ofAmerican photographers, has documented the lives and livelihoods of working people. From an early emphasis on occupational health and safety, Dotter has expanded his range of subjects to include environmental hazards to public health.
Rob Amberg:

For much of my twenty-year career in photography I have wrestled with issues of participation and observation: how to play an active role and establish everyday relationships in the rural communities that I photograph. This takes a lot of time. It also makes it difficult to earn a living doing engaged photography.
I was born in 1947 and raised in theWashington, D.C., area, a product of the Catholic school system, themiddle class, and the baby boom. My parents worked for the federal government. Montgomery County, Maryland, was the fastest growing county in the United States, with one of the five highest median incomes. I spent much of my childhood looking for a place to get lost — wanting to get away from the suburban sprawl, the congestion, and the noise.

By the time I graduated from the University of Day-
ton in 1969 with a degree in personnel management and a minor in psychology, I had become very involved in social issues — Vietnam War protests and civil rights. In my senior year I had put together a slide/tape presentation that was my first experience with a 35-millimeter camera. I remember my strong attachment to the camera and the control that it gave me. I thought, then, in terms of capturing an image.

After college, I received conscientious objector status, became a VISTA volunteer, and did my alternative service as a pre-school teacher in Tucson, Arizona. I took beginning courses in photography and was very much influenced by the work of Lewis Hine, Dorothea Lange, and Eugene Smith. I began to see the possibility of using a camera as a tool for social change.

In 1973, feeling like my life lacked cloudy days and greenery, I was ready to move back East. On my way to the I). C. area, I stopped to visit an uncle who had settled in Madison County, North Carolina, which is northwest of Asheville. I realized almost immediately that this was a place that I had wanted to find since I was a kid. So I settled there.

When I arrived, I intended doing the definitive photo book on mountain culture. I had very preconceived ideas of what that meant. I was taken with the romance of the idea of wizened faces, old women in doorways, men
fiowiiig-i'u(o die sutise(s. 1 r'iat s wr'ia( f though( (Le pi'ace was all about. Those early photographs, as I look at them now, feel like cliches. The misty morning light of hog butchering. I would get out on mornings and see the light with the smoke and the fog and I would drool.

After I had lived in the area for about a year and a half, I had the good fortune to meet Dellie Norton, age seventy-six, and her adopted son Junior. Dellie had adopted Junior when he was about six years old. He was emotion-ally retarded and in bad physical condition when he came to live with her. Dellie was a community elder, a tobacco farmer, and a very noted ballad singer. She helped me and others who came new into the mountains to bridge cultural and generational gaps. She was a mountain per-son who was very interested in the outside world and in outsiders.

Soon, she enlisted me as her chauffeur of choice. She opened me to the community of Sodom Laurel. We drove around the county, visiting relatives and neighbors. I
would carry her to perform at music festivals. Dellie said I could come to her house as often as I wanted, and I took her up on that. We would sit on her front porch, playing cards, talking.

Most of the people living in Dellie's community at that time had been on the land for generations and continued to farm, often full-time. The people here had an intimate and tangible knowledge of the land that was difficult for me, a suburbanite, to understand. Land provided a life for them.

The people of Madison County will do most anything to stay on their land. When the county closed its commu-
nity schools and switched to consolidated
schools, many children were riding two
hours, one way, to school. They would put
up with that to stay put.

Dellie Norton told me of her family's
having to leave now and then to work in
cotton mills in South Carolina when she
was a child. Once, her father left for two
years and worked in a bathtub factory in Pennsylvania. She didn't know him when
he returned. When Dellie was sixteen, she
cooked in a logging camp. All in efforts to
make enough money to stay on the land
and farm.

Not only do the people in Sodom Lau-
rel have a strong sense of place, they con-
tinue to have a strong sense of ritual. For
me, being raised Catholic, ritual was some-
thing I understood. In Madison County, a community's sense of ritual isn't so much interested in end results. It is much more day-to-day. The events that I was invited to photograph were so personal and involved that I had no choice but to get close.

Photographically at this time, I became less interested in control and more interested in spontaneity—photography as a form of visual notetaking. Rather than seeking the perfect photograph, I started becoming more interested in the process of events.

One feature of everyday life in Madison County for the last seventy years or so has been the farming of burley tobacco. Tobacco is a very labor intensive crop — a thirteen month crop. Itwas introduced specifically to keep people on their land. Of course, one of the ironies of tobacco is that what most people consider America's number one cause of death has allowed some small rural communities to stay alive.

Historically, tobacco has been worked by families and neighbors helping neighbors, working together to get the crop planted, to get it in the barn, get it to market on time. But what's happening now is that the young people are not at all interested in working the crop, and large crews of migrant farmworkers are coming in. You don't see small patches any more; everybody has got at least ten acres.

In 1978, I received an National Endowment for the Arts grant that allowed me to expand my Madison County work to include rural towns and the influx of newcomers into the county. I bought land in the county and homesteaded. Had a son and started a house. I even raised a couple of tobacco crops. But I learned quickly that I didn't have the necessary skills or mindset to be a farmer.

In the mid-1980s, I began freelance work for the Rural Advancement Fund, a fifty-year-old non-profit organization with its roots in the Southern Tenant Farmers' Union. They hired me to document the effects of the drought on small family farmers in the Southeast. Then I stayed on staff to help with the RAF's fiftieth anniversary celebration, which involved publishing a history of the organization and doing a photo exhibition on small family farms.

My boss at Rural Advancement Fund, Cary Fowler, let me work in my own manner. I would spend days on family farms throughout the region, photographing and interviewing, and helping with farm work. I tried to be-come involved in the lives of the families. If it meant getting up at three o'clock in the morning to milk cows, I was out there. The effect was to build intimacy and trust with the people I was photographing.

I learned that more farms went out of business dur-
ing the 1980s than in the 1930s. Loan policies had forced many small family farmers to get larger when they didn't necessarily want to be. Planting fencerow to fencerow was the practice: people borrowed money, then land values dropped, cost of production stayed high, and the price they were being paid for their commodities went down. Because of the financial pressures they were facing, farmers were not able to take care of their land. They often, for instance, neglected to plant cover crops.

This was a culture being lost. Farm families ceased to see farming as a viable option for their children. More and more land was owned and operated by retirees or absentee landlords. Daily customs disappeared. People didn't visit house to house. No one went down in the heat of the day to the country store and talk with their neighbors. The country stores were replaced by Wal-Marts.

I also photographed corporate agriculture for the Rural Advancement Fund. In North Carolina that mainly means poultry. Poultry is a vertically integrated industry, with the large corporations owning everything about the birds, from top to bottom. Even the birds on a farm are not owned by a farmer, but by a company. The company dictates how the birds are to be taken care of, and how much the farmers will be paid. Farm families, again in an effort to say on their land, will borrow hundreds of thou-sands of dollars to put up two or three turkey barns or chicken barns. For this they are awarded the security of one six-week contract. The poultry companies have divided up the territory so farmers have no recourse but to stay with one company. If their contract is cut off, they're out of luck and faced with huge debt. Sometimes farmers have been forced to foreclose because contracts were cut off, and then the poultry company has come in, bought the farm, and installed the same farmers back on their own places as tenants.

Working with Rural Advancement Fund reminded me of my initial motives for using photography as a tool for social change.

I resigned my staff position with RAF in 1988 so I could move back to the mountains and continue my own documentary projects. I wanted to be closer to my son. I also realized that place had become important to me and the place I wanted to be was Madison County.

In recent years I have supported myself with freelance work for a variety of non-profit and editorial clients, both regionally and nationally. I have begun projects on sustainable agriculture with the Rural Advancement Foundation International and, with the Appalachian Consortium, documentation of the current construction of a corridor of Interstate 26 as it cuts through my county.	^
