Earl Dotter:

By way of contrast, I now reside in the county where Rob Amberg grew up — Montgomery County, Maryland. From there I head out to my assignments. I think Rob is fortunate to work where he lives. But a different set of challenges meets photographers who must travel to the locations where their subjects are.

My artistic development began during my teenage years. After a boating accident, I was confined to bed for several weeks. My mother gave me a John Nagy art book to pass the time. I started to draw covered bridges with three point perspective, portraits of Abraham Lincoln, and so on. As I discovered my natural ability, I began to study art. My real enthusiasm for it developed when I saw the impact it had on my social life. I had been an extremely shy child and an awkward adolescent. By drawing pictures of the weekly football stars and having them posted on the high school bulletin board, I suddenly got the kind of recognition I had never known before. Sketching a portrait of the homecoming queen led to a treasured friend-ship.

I graduated from the University of California at San Jose with a degree in graphic design in 1967. My design instructor encouraged me to get the full Madison Avenue experience by en-rolling in the School of Visual Arts. So I moved to Manhattan. One of the courses which I took was intended to
acquaint future art directors with photography so that they could direct a photographer to execute a visual concept. My instructor was a successful but disenchanted advertising photographer who insisted that we take pictures that expressed a personal point-of-view. He wouldn't talk about our pictures unless they did.

After several meetings, somebody finally took a photo that really did say something in a heartfelt way and the teacher spent the entire class talking about that one photograph. I learned from that experience and started to take pictures in a very active way. My instructor put me in touch with graphic designer Milton Glaser who was then redesigning New York magazine. Soon, my photosappeared on a couple of New York covers and some double spreads. What better encouragement for an emerging photographer?

A pivotal moment for me came in that same year. In another course at the School of Visual Arts we reversed roles, the students giving assignments to the teachers. One night we were meeting on the top floor of the Young & Rubicam agency on Madison Avenue. We had as-signed our instructors to respond visually to the Bob Dylan song "Something is happening but you don't know what it is, do you Mr. Jones?" One of the teachers interrupted our session to announce that Martin Luther King
had been killed in Memphis. Immediately the class broke up. As I headed home on the subway I read a message in big red letters on the wall: "The last of the nonviolent men are gone. Arise and kill whitey, the eternal target." I can trace this as the moment when I decided to put down my advertising tools and begin to become a photographer engaged in social issues.

About this time I received 1-A status from Selective Service and faced the probability of a tour of duty in Vietnam. Instead I was able to select alternative service and was sent as a VISTA worker to the Cumberland Plateau region of Tennessee. The coal fields were facing particularly tough times as heating oil was replacing coal as home fuel. Mines were shutting down. Those who could leave Appalachia for the auto plants and steel millsof the North did, leaving the young, the old, and the less educated. As VISTA workers, our job was organizing grassroots programs to develop cooperatives to provide basic needs, such as housing, Head Start, and adult education programs. As I photographed these efforts, I met the people of this region in their homes and communities.

I met many coal miners who were dissatisfied with
the state of their union. Disabled miners were not getting
benefits, miners who had retired were not getting
pensions, or if they did, it was fifty dollars a month. The
United Mine Workers had become known for murder
and mayhem. I was invited to become a full-time staff
member for the Miners for Democracy campaign in
Charleston, West Virginia. With the election of the re-
form candidates, I moved to the union's Washington,
D.C., headquarters to work as the UMWA
Journal photographer. I traveled the coal fields, documenting occupational health and environmental hazards and the rich traditional culture of mining.

The camera allowed me do work which was meaningful on a daily basis. From the coal fields, my photography has taken me into a wide variety of working lives throughout the United States. My goal behind the camera is to celebrate the accomplishments of workers and community activists, to emphasize their pride and skills, and to document the satisfactions of their jobs as well as the dangerous and dehumanizing aspects. I look for workers and community activists who are taking steps to improve their lives and, with photography, seek to en-courage their achievements.

For people to reveal themselves be-fore the camera, I really feel I first must let them know who I am and to explain why I want to take their picture. After you have become acquainted, folks are more apt to live out their lives rather than act them out before the camera. Because so many of the people whom I photograph endure brutal working conditions or impoverished lives which can victimize, I am careful to look for the common ground that workers share with the viewers of the photographs. Often this is simply the desire to be treated with dignity and self-respect. Motivated by my own concern for their situation, I try to photograph in a way that will touch not just viewers who are already sympathetic to their plight, but will reach out and get the attention of people who might normally pass them by. I try to achieve this by taking a picture that has visual power, that has a graphic and clear beauty. It is this aspect that often appeals to viewers who are not initially concerned with the subject itself, bringing them back for a second look.

When I walk through a plant or work site, I will some-times encounter that individual who exudes a sense of personal worth, who illustrates the notion of the human family, and I always jump at the opportunity to record them. When I experience tragedy in the workplace— death, disability, and exploitation — I use the camera to record not just the person or event, but also my own reaction to it. If I am successful, then the viewer will be able to stand before the photograph and feel the intensity of the moment that I felt.

I take care to avoid distorting or altering the scene for the sake of "art" whose result simply panders to viewers. Although I strongly identify with the underlying issues of the photo I am creating, I try to let the subject guide me with suggestions, ideas, and point of view. It is not enough for the photographer to convey his or her own point of view, as you often see in so-called "objective" photojournalism. Such voyeuristic photography is, in fact, not objective but is geared toward expressing only the photographer's perception. It ignores or underemphasizes in-formation that runs contrary to the photographer's particular perspective. Although there is some merit in showing viewers the world as the photographer sees it, it can twist or not tell the full story.

To photograph in a way that lets subjects communi-
cate with viewers, you must take time to learn the way
subjects present themselves to the world physically, in
their body language, their gestures and motions, and
their looks. You draw from that information to develop a
picture-taking strategy before you start taking the actual
photos. You begin working in a candid way, letting the
subject lead, and gradually work into a more posed mode to intentionally capture nuances you have observed in the process. Sometimes, when a subject freezes up, I will discuss mannerisms and gestures that I have observed him or her make, and suggest that the individual recreate these natural poses for me. For example, I might say "a moment ago, you put your hand under your chin and just rested your elbow on the table there." It's something the person has probably done thousands of times, but before the camera a little guidance is needed to recreate it.

I want to capture the moment clearly, in the midst of the action, and in response to the smell, the atmosphere, the three dimensions, and the physical proximity. That's not to deny the value of other approaches. But, for me, it's the most effective means for creating images of telling beauty and artistry, of transcending the commonplace.

If the photographer has rapport with the subject, the subject will let the viewer into the personal realm, over-coming barriers — such as the invasion of space — that normally exist. To be an effective photographer in the most delicate of situations, you have to be sure you are welcome.

The camera allows certain features or characteristics of the subject to be emphasized in a way that cannot be captured with the human eye. There are unlimited ways to freeze the moment. While you draw from reality, the way in which you use the camera and the extent of your visual vocabulary make a personal photographic statement. I try to learn from my experience of happy accidents and how to repeat them in another context. A good photograph draws viewers in on levels that range from the obvious to the symbolic to the concern with details of foreground and background.

I try to photograph a subject in several different ways. In the leisure of the darkroom, you can look at the proof sheets and compare the images, finding the ones which resonate more powerfully. If you don't explore the subject fully behind the camera, you can't learn what is there.

Photographs have the capacity to bear witness at the most gut level and to uniquely distill information and feelings. This is true as much for the snapshots that make up the family album as it is for professional photojournalism. We return to these still shots year after year, to savor and remember.

The proliferation of magazines makes the still photo-graph as much in demand as ever. Although magazines have emphasized the color image (I have slowly enlarged my work to include more color), there is a continuing interest in the power of black and white photographs. In fact, many of us "older" black and white photographers are enjoying a renaissance of appreciation.
In looking at my early work and comparing it with my
more recent work, one of the greatest differences is that when I was young and free of family and other responsibilities, I was able to allocate long blocks of time, even years, to a given subject. Although I do not have that freedom today, I have built steadily and consistently on that early body of work, by continuing to focus on occupational subjects and environmental-related issues, trade union activity, and workplace health and safety concerns. By
retaining my focus over the years, I have been able to build a professional reputation that I do not believe I would have accomplished had my subject matter been more scattered. I have also developed an understanding of my subjects that can only come over time. This has been key in my ability to succeed as a freelance photojournalist, and to make a contribution in which I can take pride.	^
