Robert Woodruff, Principal, Simmons Elementary School

Robert Woodruff served as a senior Guide Principal with the Delta Principals Institute, a peer leadership development project led by SRC 1992-1997.

I have been in the Hollandale, Mississippi school system for thirty-nine years, as both a teacher and an administrator.

I got into education by accident. I was a pre-med major and on my way to medical school when I stopped to visit my old roommate in Hollandale- my first visit to the Delta. My old roommate was an educator and, at that

time, was teaching summer school. Dur

ing my visit, his father, a local principal, asked me to teach a summer school science class. After l worked a few months, I decided to teach a year before I went to medical school.

I can't describe the experience. The kids were encouraged by someone taking a great interest in helping them learn. The Delta is very rural and the main source of income at that time was agriculture. Most people lived in shanties. The conditions were just terrible. It was like a third world country.

So here are these kids, bright-eyed,

really wanting to do something. I felt I could make difference. I still intended to go to medical school, bul after working that year, I decided to stay another year and then another. That's how Tended up in education.

We've reduced class sizes and we've brought in some new programs. We give the students who score in th bottom quartile extra help-tutoring or whatever is nec essary-to bring them up to grade level. We've gorn back to some of the basic things that were successful ir the past. We teach phonics again. We have after-schoo programs and before-school programs. We run on a ten month school year.

 Hollandale's population is about 3,500 and our schoo: teaches seven hundred students with a staff of aboui sixty-five. The students are about 98 percent African American and about 98 percent of my kids eat free lunch

Our kids are not exposed to a lot of things that urban kids are. We don't have the library facilities, the museums, and the parks. Therefore, our curriculum is de signed to get kids out of the classrooms. If we are discuss ing the Mississippi River, we go to the Mississippi River They go on field trips to Jackson, to Memphis, to Wash ington, D. C., to Houston and the Dallas area. It's awhok community; we go to the community and the community comes to us.

We use a curriculum designed by the Audrey Cohen College of Human Services called the American School Model. It is purpose-centered education. We have gone from the traditional teacher-centered mode to a child-centered format.

There is no magic formula. But we have experienced a lot of success in teaching AfricanAmerican children. I attribute a lot of that success to having good staff. There is a critical shortage of teachers in Mississippi. But we attract and retain good teachers by treating our staff as family members.

This family atmosphere helps them work together across grades to help the kids. Instead of criticizing each other about what you didn't do in the prior grade, you can be critical of what children don't know before they are promoted, but from a positive standpoint

We still need more community involvement and support. We have a lot of trouble with the private schools here. Most of the white kids go to the private schools. So you have some community neglect of public educa

tion. We make the difference up through grant funds and similar programs, but we still need a greater commitment.

Being in a rural area, with the mechanization of agriculture, people are realizing that you can't put an uneducated person on a $100,000 tractor anymore. The power brokers now realize that they need an educated worker. So, the community is coming around. Our churches and banks have supported us. My staff is now about 50-50 African American to white. We recently hired a lot of white teachers. Once they begin working here, you pull in their husbands and families and now they know that, "Hey, they're doing a good job over there. We didn't know that."

We are unintentionally destroying the private school system by gradually drawing away their staff and their students, too. A lot of the problem has been that they just didn't know that we were really serious about educating children. Now that they are aware, we will continue to make great progress.

In the forty years I've been in Hollandale, we have produced about twenty-one or twenty-two black doctors from this school district. We can't get them to come back to the Delta, but we have produced them. So, we have a track record of producing good students.
Dr. Lisa Delpit on Educational Excellence

Dr. Lisa Delpit is the Director ofthe Centerfor Urban Educational Excellence and holds the Benjamin E. Mays Chair of Urban Educational Leadership at Georgia State University. Author of the book, Other People's Children: Cultural Conflict in the Classroom, Delpit has engaged in teaching and learning about multicultural societies and public education in Fiji, Papua, New Guinea, and the United States-including Alaska. Using a similar model, Deip it's experience ratifies the Southern Regional Council's approach to changing schools.

In an urban setting like Atlanta, the first issue in improving education is to ensure that teachers believe that the children are capable of learning anything anybody else is capable of learning. You have to give teachers visions of what can be. They are so accustomed to being a part of failure that they don't realize that children who look like their school's population can and have succeeded in other settings. The teachers also need to be willing to use a multitude of instructional strategiesrather than just using one strategy over and over againto ensure that all children are grasping the issues that they need to understand to be successful. When teachers teach only through one model, and the kids don't learn, then they think something is wrong with the kids. Instead, the problem maybe that teachers aren't reaching the students.

That's what I do. I try to change those perceptions because the reality is that nothing can change until the

classroom changes. You can make all the systemic changes you want, but until what goes on in the classroom changes, then I don't think a whole lot will change.

You almost have to work from all sides of a school system at the same time. If you leave any one area unattended, it can create a black hole into which all of your good work and success gets sucked.

For example, if a group of teachers were trying to work together to integrate curriculum, but the principal does not understand the value of what they are doing, that principal might do something as simple as change a planning schedule so the teachers are unable to meet together. That could destroy their effort. Or maybe the school does not make an effort to engage the parents in the planning process. The parents, if they don't understand what the school is trying to do, can see it as shortchanging their children and they can attack or destroy the program from that direction.

You have to work with all of the players. You have to work with the teachers to help them develop ways to work together and feel comfortable with each other. You also have to inform and work with the parents.

You need to get folks with a lot of energy and commitment and just do it. Provide them with a vision of what could be and then have the teachers themselves plan it and work on it. It empowers them at the same time that you are creating the vision and the new instructional methodologies.
