Remembering and Forgetting


I )iivh I ligli I. Ilarl and Reunion: J7,r ('iv,! War in
tifl('fl((Ifl 1lr,i,,irii. IPi'ton, Harvard I irriversily P1(55,





I(viewvd fly Bland whilley

	(lint 1l i	over the iontill iii'd use of the
( oiil icrate b;i!t]		lag have demonstrated, the legacy of
	itmi( ivil\\artemn imisatrommimnermt fcalilre ill Ow political
of 1;indsA ;if)(-	the ontli. In Mississippi arid south Caro-
Ii omiflum 	pro- mid anti-flag, forces ignited
In' kind of inilsi named ;tctivi'ni that issues-such as
ii calm i, commomitic development, and electoral reform
rui'lv simmi capable 01 inspiring. Clegrgria may have'
ivomd(rt these passion- by inaugurating a new flag in the
-nmnkvirriilorsol Ii IegisIatureith little prior warn-
i (although hmkrd by year'- of proposals), but tills
renialmms to in' seen. Already, there are rumble that White
nmriI voters may take their anger out on time legislators Imo '-uipportml miimmngimig the statu' flag as well as on
I )'niui( ratm( (overnor Roy Riiroes. Some observer are
eVen Citing the ll'ag isstmu' as the political wedge that
RpbItcan have been sucking in their.efforis to seize
mnajormtme in thu ligislatmiru' After all this time the Civil
War peri-ts as a vessel into which different constitnen-
	poor their political wishes and frustrations. Why do
	many people, particularly conservative white
o)utlm'rnurs, r big to the war as a defining element in
thiir dint jties
David Plight's onsterfud work_does not sit (lilt to
;n-vo' this question, hill it is essential reading for any(lie who might wish to wr"stie with the issues raised by the war and why tiny continue iii resonate in contemporary America. Covering the fifty years following Appotijattox, Plight mna1vzes how different groups con structed their memories of the Civil War and how these rue rim ri ' took root in 11w national Coil scion sn es', or laded into the bma kg mu 11(1. RI igh t 0 ii tl nes' t Ii ree main forums of Civil War niernor all of which fostered thiHr iri master riarrative 'maricip;mtionist, mainly charac-i ilir oI African Ani-rians arid uIi'if allies;
N-I ori(mliaumonmm5t, a largely white northern affair, arid white ii, the tajncr of most white southerners [he
mriaiii throat of Blight'( account (l,tail% flow
'Oil mlitOniu:mi 4( mid ited utsetfto the white suipremna-
it n4rratrvr, therby nuargmnalii,ing tile emancipationi,lt
1-non in iii m ri-gap] (uvul Warrnemory (and forgettin)
tyjvrij fhr wy for t](' rnargmnahiiation of African Amer-i-
tans in other walks W life. ft rejei!irig the more Piilitally thaged rfliaITkip tioiiist intrprtiition 1JO1 by ostug s4ttional healing over racii )II"ticc, northern white" fit-, iped ik'in1i tI IV it ah4iicalioti of S0iitittn fl air to ttir ti)iT11CU iflif knetnhrance of the Wiit I)cg ati eV4Ii be lore iii etoiflict had ended Ilir (tttvsborg .\ Iress ;ijinoiintrd one path that Americans coiieclivt ITOifloV\' night ti()(

I reflecting on the causes of the war and on iii sacritiTrs of the soitlier, Anieriuans night fashion i new, if tantihar. Aittericani creed that v.ioiid finally live tip to the egahitanan ideals of the Revolution. I )pile, and in sonne respects hl-Cause of, white southern itiransigeitee, this ni)igncaiir charged initrrpretatin did txtr1 a powerful influence Oven' the public imagination in the imnndiate Vstwar era, It helped shore up radical Iinstruction.t, if iMuiC ternperarilv and fostered widespread r a'ntifl(nt of tht Confederate cause. flu' narrative of a reborn nation povc'd peciidiv ccuinpehljng for African Americans whose reuo'rnhrait;/'as spiked by public celebrations ofenianiptn nd of t} seice of black seldiflrs. In fact, Blight is  d evidence which shows tiit Menitui'ial l)av

iN. liNt incarnation among Ire ieopie and their

whtt allies in Charleston shortly after the wars

at its moment of triumph, this enianc-ipaltonnst Won was viekiing to the thirst for reconciliation. lhr' central irony running through Rlights account is thu" dmruiagr that file humane goal of overcoming sect iortuih hatreds did to the Yissi )ili-ty for a mom r'gahitariari union, fli p(obh': with healing divisions was that it could only i i-ned by stripping war retnuihrance of ii

Lieu i(lii,. uldiersofeithrrsiuhc Might be honored tc 'tie urt Oi- - of coo rage and persistence they all shared, O I5MJr. like war causat iou or African Americans

on equal citiza'nship appeared sectional heat grew

_U4)intrntw. ['be ontirtued vdttical well-being of blacks tn h4'r words, on the enmity of northern and

As Frederick Douglass sum'd mat

1! ar &uuuong the whites brought peace and liberty e bt k. what will peace among the whites bring?" re, ec otaiiiifst impulse emerged first among southrn ziirs tans io'l rxnihern conservatives, who urged

Vt r war's destruction behind them and

- y t- lt r ii i i-ornrnon good Initially a defensive

siirr ha .oghr t r,rct onw the biftrnnss of radical an- and I. 'ife4rritr die-harnis, rnconcihtitn rw c') for how white Atrirrtcarns

(r rr,r r war As Recotistrun-tion

the JugtL iii southern white viokn-en

'; ar1s ifl t i14"Witc' tiwmsetvri niore

ii reas we[ f corporate ifldntfl

*ic na-ttrri wh' inw iii racunrly unwilling to

)'xarrnne the political dynamics of the 'ar and its iepacv

'ntinitental paeans to soldiers and imnmcrsions in the minutiae of battle strategy replaced analyses of the agonizing issues that still confronted American society.'

iout hero whites were only too happy to pail icipati' iii these apolitical remembrances. Yet stripping id('olog\ from memory was never part of We southerners strat

On the"contrary. they asserter) the righteousness of

the Confederate cause, and We acknowledging that slavery's end might have been a good thing, they discounted slaverv as a source of the conflict Tjius was horn the statet rights explanation that continues to work smh rriisehinf in American politics and t'ul;iuri'. As the atterttori of northern whites drifted away from the war, smith rfl'i whites intensified their interest in the rece'nt jaw In the -nutimrnital fiction of writers hike f'ltoiiias Nelson Page in the coulinflenTiorative exeruno's of the I tuited ( tL'flr' Veterans and the I titled I)augbfu'rs of Of, ( iuifrrh'r.wv and in hurgeorurig historical societies an un rnprerruusinug narrative rflierge(h [his narrative sub

') fe rr n-tx ijua-tn-,nis-t vision under a whip' supru'nmiui

cit package with severaicomponents. tltu comity exist
Ii ih-r 'mil ln i- it IIi ( t'il It. III( rilil rI-ti I -iii, liii i  niiil di

ii ri-ill! Hit- np4-lIr r---inr -H}l Nuiih. lit1Yrni ni .hiti- If -viti-r tinilir ,iVrt tad ( ;trl

I),lrr nip cInrin kin niHrnlln. in" l hi- oil or nih !rniiiipltnitt it-Iltril 'lI-fft'Ilttiil pitt -ti ttwi-i I1ititlli nix, Lt t- I st ii '--;ir hut ohm i st n-ti-il in trt-s-r

¥ hin- tipri:!litt' 1irrrh - pr i litt ;t ninth 1 1)1 1 hp

it tin In- rv,I id Hit, is rli.-itn it! is tlt-;tr hr n--dy it ii- iii

Ad 'ii'. itilip-ru who" thin- to jtett of liii- pi(tiiiirtk-r;tli i;tir:tIi-, hal nit-pt it By luL F 15pl4l!lin "oh tip- Hiti oUi1i ;i -ll Is Hit-IF F:oistii htl-;lr ii Ii:nt- h--i1 niH il-ptsjvl- iii On, anvilslit llL ntptrltti-11, ;I lIilti jtst-rH, wt itt-n pitt

-nttn-rtt;tiit lii- roriiiitiut- i silyrihIl-. ii Iltiliti

n ill ilip-- inI- lit iihHtini-, mid if I li-limp lit ;ii-rt-stltprl7tIi-(-It-:iJlsI)tljl1llljlsl!bsl1WI-- Far jth flu i;llituiitl !,III phi hil UFiii, ln-t;uiil- III( - tI ttItiiittit of skLilttti;tI I-i

'--nt ratip-r titan h- ri-;iht;iluttti up \jni-rh;us ti-tilt

-- roinist- flht)1 pIuI tttaitpiul;uli-il. ;\iri' an - --aPI do liltic- No tall hat k in on Ihinisvlvc-s, itiiul-,

h - Rtkcr -l \ltllupiiti and Fits ;uPitifliutl;iIjttitI-t

n. atc-pi-il 1i.- apt 1 -ittttul rl-ronUiIujltiitt.t.

morn raclh;tI Arks ri-jnird thc nnitiiitialinnist

Vishiun is iis-h-ss iii a uau-tv that had provcd "'o unwilling it nt-pt lu-tn as i-path -itiztiis:onlv t-iingr;ition toAfrica wonitl ;tI1c lair IIIOIP hoj)tnI and fort -ltd visual would -rust but in virtual siihP-rrait -at iii it ii lii 1 Iii - F vii lipJit s \ii vi -iia-nt I nP-asla-d it hat 1, lii lit- \iiii-rit;Ilt tti.istltullslit-ss.

F tIll-lIly; llil-lnttrit-s, Ililits n-li-v;uit work shows, at, sttiltbtrn -alit-s !hi-v.ll-flvn lroiii fIlrIdaInPIItal (MM and Ii itt ttiin;iflhtiis, and hit-v ping into ongoing ttltltt:;tI it-balis lucy also can bi-tonit- t'xhaiisting for llitti- titi iinirinpiili iivnstt-d in III(- politic,, undcrlyjn ~~Win

lii Ihi- lap ilihatis tilt host >o]iticitd grnl1)s hV( - igaju h-i-u u:itist-uativi' MAC, arid dt-Phi(lPrs of -pitlitarituitusitu. irunarilv Alrii an Ati-ricans. Iinsisting that tin-jr purlillar visions r(-c(-ivt- widtsjiriad public ri-t-itgiuliruu tad svnibolui i]tsj)lav, hay havc dcnioristralt'd Iii- lip it irt;ii it- Of lit- past. As in Ow i-arhrr p-riod that h1ip!t IlilS sit skilliiuI]v inalvzt-d. ;I Ildrd group to itira-I !or la- sal-I- ol jii n-ss. lhroiigli III(- din of ihtli;uvt-ciia-rpi-diituiipliiiut--that t tunctiaattc'rutioiito lush its. ok dist rat1 1it-opltIron lion- important probIt-ui---. vii-' Uu_i il-itloitit-al hait]t-s (cvcr I hi- pa-t as an (tt)stitlilt ttt tipittil griu1h. tip-sc- t-conornic progrt-ssiv(-s ha", titiplit to stiiIutn piihli spatt' of conirovorsial syrnPius I lin.i-vi-r iist-ltul tins altu-toru-al approach has bin-n in Ow tauihi-inpor;i light to r(-nlavt- III(- C onfc'di-ratc hilt]- lap from piuhhc inapt-s. it can n(vt-r bc morn than thtHltisttPilii stipporti-rith-gaFtarian us(-,and oftnn will WON tijtiunsl lit-in. I?ar- and RPunzon tt-aclit-s us that in at i-;trlii-r tiiuit. whiPsuiprnuuuacisls t'xploitid the poIitnal uiaLv it rt-tiuutiluationists.who spoke a language imiar to unit of inlays t-conuimni( Jirogrsives, to isuri' that Ilic-ir VisUfll of history would gain- as(-c-ndcnc(- in thi' soujllts political (uhittirt-. Tin: staki---, may not he as high lislav, hut tlut- iliouct-s are similar. Which histories w( -to ri-Irut-Inber and honor will continue to shape Our political Lruds&ajx- In ways that an ahistorical faith in unpmtalm-u progress cannot. B-tter that those memone.s hi-Ip fri rtht-r Li- goals of democracy rather than prqp up tltt si rli-rs of past- and [)rt-s4-rui racist agen1as. -  U

//and Wh it/r it (J dorlaru/ rindujati in hztJwy at the

I n u ic'ruty a! J'ia,-idtj I/i' z rum-nily studying hzsloriral

wirraht I'S en /-itns1yurItin in
