Election Reform Needs Federal Action

Fy Catherine Wall

hr Florida f( 0!) -ha(Ir of 2) hroiiht ft

-tir nt rr'forrli and rnnitn'un simd;irds If, thr for-

o n ona] (lr})at-. noi a vrcir ]at-r a- lilvO

tr- PUS 01 ; -ctori] Won" in ( igr"--. tlir r]chahrri J1 what standards should b niandalrd I) thi

k1fril rnrrient n ordir to onsuri rrfflal ])rOtfCIIOfl of

ntaf right 11)

to arguing that fir] nrr; rights haw- ]way rfr

ar'r-d r-,itiynaJ pro4-ctnn rvIorrn hgishon spn-A)r

-nno Chrnyhrr D odd (D-( on-) ltrs ifir Brown

'7 fr4rrtion 'ir't'grr'gat on inandair of I '- ho

(i I'uhhc :rrir1  liii ,\'i of I44, the

arid- hr Anirricaii with f)iahili

!W% Awl -, r- 'rry at wr ought orb in rKq

(ltnr- r-r - that to ailing boot Ii Fri rnjr Or 4itO- ri rniJ 14w hr rrt room and or

ha;; 0 4 pl(r whrrr' riuaI 4(CrMn for all

guaran P -i-iL

LIed on rcform proposals currently heforc Congrcss r]ilav,thi- tonsirn- between state and federal control

ivir (li)tiOfl procedures, a clash rooted in IJb  story

. iL profound implications for fairness in nlections.

Balance of Election 'Law Power

;\ oornplicatnd balance of election law power hetwcen tin- stalls and the federal government dates fiom the framing of Op UriitndStates Constitution. As memhrs at Of- Constitutional Convention of 1787 drlerniinrd the proci-ss for nincting fndnraj officials conflict arose over 'hobs or power to hapn flint A-doral process should rr-it in or fi;iiid ol If-nh-mi (r st-un officiak. As Michael

);iinfi>ir iiotr-r in an April 2t)I ;irlnln 1iuhiislud by Die ( onl,lu1ion Prop-ri JnirnMadison '.vas passiounin in his wqpwi of a grin-"] govr-ruiinr-nt riiur,ny fun dl-l)alrs of On Contitiiii-rria] Coni'irntion Nor yak IAgnihiturrs wijfl irnrtijr- fail or rrIuw Ii) consult th common
interest at the rxx'nse of their lc;al conveniency or prejudices.- Madison said, adding that the time, place, apd manner of elections that were to be in control of the states Were "words of great latitude. It is impossible to foresee all the abuses that might be made of the discretionary power'
	The system of government that the mrrn}wrs leninally agreed upon in 11787 created two primary separate sources of power that interweave and temper each other. Any power not specifically allocated to the federal government re with the "states respectively, or t the people" as defined in the Tenth Amendment
Election procedure is an area of law that has histori-cally been dominated by the states. As the Elections
Clause in Arlicle I, Section 1 f the Constitution provides:
-Me Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for
Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each
State by the Legislature thereof."This phrase has defined
electoral procedure throughout our nations history with
the states designing their own electoral systems and
procedures independent of federal control. The second
portion of th1a clause, however, offers a balance to state
control: '-btt t11 hr	may atany,firne by 12w make
or after such Regulations, except at() the Places of
chusrng (sic) Senators" This fedrz4 balance to state
power has provided the foundation f federal election
laws such as the Fifteenth and Nineteenth Amendments,
cxiendng the vote to African Americans and women.
rsv'e}y; and the Voting Rights Ad of I ~X3,5 its amended
in 192 which disallowed poll taxes and literacy tests and
initiated the requirement for states and counties wish a
history oLricnmination to obtain federal preclearance of
all voting Law changes before the Ia'ws are enacted.
	In addit)n to the Elections Clause, the Constitution provwtrs three other sources of federal power over
tons. notes Stanford University Law Professor Pamela
Kaftan, Constitutional authority includes the power con-"d by Sectxn 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, which
rmwers the federal government to enforce legislation
prr',chng for equal protection and clue process; the Spend-
mg Ciaric. ch:xh affords Congress the right o decide
what t will fund for the states; and the Commerce Clause,
	hh a}ows for Congress to have some control aver 'w that afkct interQat commerce. The federal govh mad' use of these powers at various times in
'ouT'w-	ior htstory, but has largely left it up to the
tati's to drstgn arid oversee the election systems and
proc edw'es within their borders.
Fitton Error Prompt
$uMp&$ty of Propoidø
flwr	ri4z 2TJ%h'rwd, 5tair mil elections were
* rw'w mabr•- ht A mu lfip&ity of disfran-chising
ii chanisius challenged the legitimacy of tilt-presidential election Different states and localities used
varying voting systems. Registered voters were turned
away from the polls because their names were errone'-
ously removed from the voter rolls. Authority was OPen
leleg;it e(l to local, entities, so inconsistent t.rocr 'don
criss-crossed counties as well as state's, wreaking havoc
with the equal protection ofthe fundamental right to vote.
With the urgency awakened by nat ioiwide inst anc 's
and practices of disfranchisement in the 2(fl) election,
the debates abe oil the balance of geiYE 'n na 'ntal pow 'ç )V( 'r
election procedures have arisen anew. Most of the more
than fifty bills relating to election reform belore Congress
focus on one' particular aspect of ekct ion reform and (It)
not offer comprehensive solutions. Several bill,.-, propose'd
in the House and Senate, however, do offer comprehen-
sive election re:fom; but vary greatly as to the division of
power between the state a'nd federal govetnme'nts.
	Some reform advocates, including Senator 1)odd and
Representative John Conyt'rs, Jr. (I)-Mich) and the two
hundred co-sponsors of their election reform proposak.
SB 5i5 and hR I t70, are pushing for sweeping changes
through federally-mandated reforms. Mandate's will re-
quire all states to enact the election reforms outlined by
Congress. Others, including Senators Mitch McConnell
(k-Ky), Robert Torricelli (1)-NJ), Sam Rrownhack tR-
Kan.), and Charles Schumer (1)-N.Y.-). and the seventy
co.-sponsors to their election re-form proposal. SB 953.
argue for reform that continues local control through
conditional grants. Conditional grants-entice state's to
enact reforms by providing federal funds for reform only
to those states that follow federal guidelines for that
reform. Other pieces of legislation, including Sen. John
McCain's (R-Ariz.) SB 9368 and Rep. Asa Hutchinsoh's (R-
Ark.) HR 354 propose electio'n reform in the form block
grants that would provide federal dollars to the start-.-,, for
such reform measures as they choose.
Election Procedures in the States-
A Patchwork Quilt
Election laws vary widely from state to state,
llit's"
Laws are made even more disparate by states (leIegating
power to localities. Municipal and county authorities of-
ten wield tremendous power over election procedurt"
and practices, and have a long history of being resistant to
any changes that benefit minority voters.
In Virginia, For example, even after the lt'gislaturt'
pQed laws to reduce requirements for vott'r idt'nt itica-
tkni-allowing voters to present an IL) or sign an alhdavit
at the po1i-s--a nurnberoI people were turned away for not
having an If). The registrars amid 1o11 workers dirt not
I oroutentfy ahidr by this new procedure, and incorrectly
dlsfratwtuM-d rrgstrccd voters. Kent Willis. t'xt'utitivt'
direct or of the Virginia AC I J', maint lOs that the result of wide of içrrtinn pxrriised by local registrars is to create a "svtrl11 '(1 uneven' arid intrpretat ions so widespread that it creates cninsion
Multiply Virginia's xp4'rience'by fifty and Ill)-' 1)111)
work cpiilt that is our lection law becomes obvious. L itiZefls who rit))(at( from one stair to another are likely to encounter Very lilf*rent rl('&'tion proc dllr)'s. (iTfl(' 01 the dlitfrren )'5 may he inil)rverll)'nt, soilie a nii'r.i' lrinvnience, but minv can wise iinsu ected disIr;incli seine 01.
	\lichael M;ilec ft tile liuisiana A( T1 was ilisiii;i'd to learn hat, unlike his honie tatr. of New York,
ma has iii) provision;il ballot option for voters who cl;iiiii
to he registered v'ri I hotigh their mines do not ;ip'iir )n the rolls. Worse, according to a study done by lie
	'fltenclng I'rup'ct, an iiiriat*' who could legally vote while serving time in her hnw state of Maine ('0111(1 be reau'ci front prison and move down tile coast to I)eltiware, onk to be disfranchised for up to five years after the
completion 1 her sentence, And it her niuve carried her
fariher south ti live in Florida, sh would be dislran-,
cimised for lift- 	article of) page si.)

Watching and Waiting:
States Are Slow to Enact Reform
'flirse discrepancies in voting system design and
	venes across statm'sand lo 'alitim'shave heightened
		arid interest in the issue of election refo-rin
	oi ip and federal levels. The creation and rn-
pr'fenfor('enlemit of uiniforrit election standards on the
stan- k". H, though, are issues that state legislatures have
l4rgrh neglected this year. Only three states, Florida,
('gra, AM Maryland. passed comprehensive reforms
that 1rr equal protection concerns through a more
mitocm snctfy. rnforud statewide systth (See article,
pase 14) 01 thoc three, Honda is the only state to have
fic.ted specifw funds for election reform Maryland Ci1l
' fr half of the Costs 01 a statewide system with the
	1,411"11 ' I federal matching dollars, and Georgia's Lns n r suap"wwte uniformity are a'rnhitious hut rely on
-' rr- ht ha yet to be appropriated by the legislature,
f' on4ing ai'r1 up)r1 from the federal government
I'd, 4ateiI Georgia Secretary of State Cathy COX
turn' Rkl hearing on election 'reform, 'We will not
r'" h 'ii goal Gm tatrwide syfrmJ by2WAwithoutit_-
0a'i a rify ( the o4lwr 'reites are waiting to 'm'
*ih,,m i'rrk-ral furwh Are apopr:;*trd The Texas k'gi'la-
ir	-* bill that d'''% a way to (I tnhiit federal
i'is nt	b	h fiirçt 4tr ahlociated to lie tafrs.
i-	- '	pLn 'r". Seerrtiai'y of Skifr llrnry
	pm'' 'otri uo th'	( on(rrriier of -aatr ij'h
'latiires ('N('SL), niany slate 'and local authorities are opposed to federally-iImil)osed election relorins. Instead. many favor election reform block grants Immit lln"federai government with no stipimlationson flow the illolleyshould he' applied. ()it its web site. (www,ncsl,org) the NC'S!. auiVo('ales that ''states he allowed maximum flexibility in crafting imimiovalive soliitmoiis to (I('iflhl'Stic prohlemns.hlie N('Sf, Suiliports block grants for broad-based purposes that would povide feuh'ral funds but allow the slates to ilet)'m'rmiim''Whlat mi'lot'ui iiie;i'um.es to-enact. I'hose purpiisi,s, according to the N( '-,*I,, should itichuh. improving -lectiomi teu'lim'imdog, Sysh'nis. and ballot design; facilitating V(.)t('r registr;itimi and mnaimitm'tlamle(' of voter rolls;
Improving the R'eIit'au'V amid security of ejection prom''-and vote u'ouuuts; providing voter seducation and poll
worker training'- and incm'eas]ng access to voter registra-
toil arid polling. Congress appears hesitant, though, to
allot such funding. from a rapidly shrinking budget sur-
plus without control over how it is used.

Congress Proposes Substantive Reform
	With fifty-one co-sponsors of the Senate version-
and one-hundred-fifty co-sponsors of Cony s's House
verion-I)odds bill is the only comprehensive election'
reform i bill that passed out of coin in itt before the Au-
gust reiess, This comprehensive reform legislation con-
taimis conditional grantsanti federal mandates. The l)odd/
('onyers proposed mandates require that voting systems
used in federal erections (fit(- !'louse version extends
thii'sm' requirements to state and local elections as well):
• provide for error jiotification;
o he hand mapped-accessible; ' -
• he accessible to those with limited English profi-
cmericy; '	-
• have an error rate lower than the standards to he'
(leternulned by the Federal Elections Commission;
• maintain procedures for provisional voting; and,
• provide a sample ballot to he mailed to each voter
not later, than ten (lays prior to the election;.
	The conditional grants included in the I)odd/Conyers bill draw on the federal powers based in the Spending Clause of the ,çonstitution. This dause empowers Congress to 'compel states to make prescribed changes by. attaching conditions to federal dollars distributed to the states. Just as states are compelled to set spemH limits on interstates in order to receive highway funding, the c(MI(hitional grants in the l)odd bill can compel states to enact election changes that will ensure voles are cast and coonted fairly. 'l'he D odd hilt would offer federal money


to Late submitting plants that-•u.4' u:iift,rm rksliorm 4Llminitration and technol-
ui'y urn4ard'i throughout Ihe state;
•kecp 44 I it ral° rrcurd to ensure registered voters
are not kicked off the rolls,
• comply with the Motor Voter .1 w, votiqg for the handicapped law,;, and the Voting Rights Act; and,
• rn plrment voter education programs.
Rv contract.	-i3, sponsored by Senators
1ConnIl. Schumer, Toricelli. and Drownhack., con-tains only conditional grant provisions. Their hill has
garnered the co-s)nsonng suØporl of seventy senators
and includes many-hut not all-of the election n'liiriii
provisions, contained in the I )o<ld/('onyerc bills.
	Senate Rill &3 would allot 2[ billion to he distrib-
uted to states that comply with all federal non-discriniiria-
tion laws: implement provisional voting: accurately main-
tain voter registration lists; expand voter education and
poll worker triiining programs: and ensure lair practices,
br overseas voters. 		-
	The bill does not require the states to maintain uniform election administration and technology across the state: to provide error-notification to voters who have made mistakes; to mail sample ballots; or to maintain an
- eror rate that is lower than the standard to he set by the Federal Elections Commission. Supporters of the Mc€onnj1-'6HJ maintain that by holding the "carrot" of fedral dolIarsut- to states, Iegislatres will enact the required n1eaiures; thereby murtherii the fairness and unionflily of our ekcln)ns process.
953 has more Senate supporters than the J)odd/
Cooyers bill due to its more moderate bipartisan upproh to federal and state power over election reform. Many lawmakers and voters who adamantly support the Dodd/Conyers bill, however, believe that the only,siubon to the nationwide election problems is federal mandates. Long time dvil rights leade'r Rev. Joseph Lowry strongly suirts mandates, arguing that electionc are "at the core of our value system" and that election reform "must not be optional; it must he mandatory"
	And Lew'i-s, of the Disability Law and Policy Center in Atlanta, voiced his support of federal mandates at thejuly 23 hearing on eledion reform issues held in Atlanta and chaired by Senators Dodd and Max Cleland (1)-Ga,). "In my epenenct a an advocate for people witI disahiliti'" izwis aid, "voluntary adherence without an estabihe' deadline translates into proknged delay and cQnonried doi-ul r,( rights and access."
	At tlw same hearing, Dodd said that he is "not erithu-
	'uast: about m daTh's," and that "they are not something
to tanw to -	1hdei --he maintained that ekction,s
for fc'4pyaj	*Oon' "ire not just local events; they affect
	the 'ntir riaion ' Rev I Jiwe-ry echoed f)odd's sis$-
rn'nf;, citing the r	dtc'ii ol' the Voting Right* Act of
faS huwd )4"y tr&s ntM poll taxci 	"can't
on		ia	the way you can't depend on alt
the,,(- countu's, Lo'ery said.
Nearly seventy hearings in election reform have
been held in Washington this year and- ninety senators
have chosen to co-sponsor comprehensive retorin legis-
lation signaling that our elected r('pres('nltatjv('s n'cog-
fliz(' the (1t'ss'rate need for reform of our election svs-
Wins. Nevertheless, politics may stand in the Way if
passage of these hills. Sern'nator I)odd's SU fi5. which i,-,
co-sponisoi'(I by all Senate l)eninocrats afl(l the liid('p'n-
(lent Senator inn J('ffor(ls but no Republicans, has been
passed out of th' Rules and Administration üiniiiuttee
and, with Majority IA.'a(l('r loin I )isciile	-sgnt'd
off as a co-sponsor, will likely he brought to the Senate
floor in the remainder of this year's session. SI
which has broad hi purl i san support and a hett 'r chanc ' garnering inure votes, currentI remains in the Senate Rub's and Administration Cuminitteu' of which l)ndd is the chair. It may 'main thi're until the 2(X)) s'ssiorl
in early October, 	-
Representative Convers's H.R. 11,70 ni'mains in 1101.1,,#.
Judiciary Committee, of 'which Representative Janus
Sensenhrenner, Ji, (R-Wis.) is the chair. Since alwust every co-sponsor of 1171) is a Democrat in a Republicancontrolled House, this proposal may also. he hnnsht'd aside. All sponsors of these proposals plan to resubmit them in 2(X)2 if no' actions are taken, but without an
action this year, 111th' reform can 6' achieved prior to the
2(X)2 elections,	- ' 	-
	As the Florida debacle confirmed, someetinies leaving matters entirely under state control comes at the expense of the right of voters, With the obvious lack of state
initiative during the 2001 llegislative sessions, federal'
action is required to prevent a repeat of last year's elec-tion fiasco. Sweeping reform is needed now to insu'r(' the
equal protection of voters' rights, Quik action on feder-
ally funded requirements, like those in the I)odd/Conv.'rs
proposal, would increase the likelihood that act ion is
taken nationwide to ensure all votes are' counted in the
2002 elections. 	-


	Visit the League of Women Voters Legislatke-Artion
Center website at: 	to leant
more about y'ox€r senator's and representative's positions on
there erection reform bills and to contact- them, urging
action.
