While the South continues to show signs of rapid economic activity, the rate of unemployment in the region, which has not been an historically severe problem as in other regions, is suggesting that economic problems are or may be ahead for Southern workers.

Although unemployment in most 11 Southern states dropped in the last years, the decline has not always been as great as in the rest of the country. While the rate of unemployment nationally dropped from 6.3 percent to 5.8 percent for the one-year period ending July 3 1, 1979, the decline in Georgia was only from 5.8 percent. In Arkansas the unemployment rate dropped only from 6.1 percent in July 1978, to 5.7 percent one year later.

The most serious indications are that four Southern states Louisiana, Florida, Alabama, and Tennessee - continue to show unemployment rates well above the national average (see map above). For example, Louisiana's unemployment rate was 6.7 percent in July and in Alabama the 7.9 percent unemployment rate was an increase over the July 1978 percentage of 7.2 percent.

The unemployment pattern in the South loosely resembles the situation in the northeast and northcentral states, when the unemployment figures in most states surround the national average with a substantial number above the average ranging from 6.5 percent to 8.40 percent. Only two states west of the Mississippi River, however, had unemployment rates in July 1979 above 6.5 percent. One was a Southern state, Louisiana, and the other was Oregon. Throughout the Midwest, unemployment rates in July were less than 4.5 percent.

Since July of this year the national jobless rate has been

hovering around 6 percent. In August it went above 6 percent and in September it dropped back to 5.8 percent. Recently the October unemployment rate showed a major shift. Likewise, the rates in Southern states appeared to have maintained generally the same pattern that existed in July.

Historically, unemployment rates in Southern states have been below the national average. Explanations for the heightened rates of unemployment often follow very much the same rationale for national unemployment. The Southern economy, like the nation's, is suffering from its fair share of layoffs and reduced production.

There may be some historically unique factors to the Southern pattern, however. U.S. Bureau of Census estimates the region is gaining substantially in population. Combined with a national trend of increased labor market participation by women and youth, the increased number of workers may be reflected in the unemployment rates of the South. Also, migration within the region from rural to urban locations may also be a contributing factor since the work skills of the rural place are not easily transferrable in urban settings.

Some economists are also suggesting that the South's regional economy remains largely undiversified with heavy emphasis on low wage service industries and manufacturing. Hence, with frequent turnovers of employment in these two industries, the South's rates of unemployment is higher than in the past.

By whatever combination, these factors may be rendering an even greater problem of unemployment for the South than the Department of Labor statistics indicate. In September the National Commission on Unemployment Statistics reported that the government's method of counting the unemployed and the definition of the "unemployed" may be substantially undercounting the actual number of people who are seeking jobs but unable to find them

In any event, the economic growth of the South with its increases in population has not automatically reduced low levels of unemployment. While the South may still lead the nation in rapid economic growth and number of jobs available, the benefits of the boom have not yet been seen by Southerners in the unemployment lines.

Steve Suitts
Southern Women:
Atlanta Honors Rosa Parks

By Janis Powell

With an official proclamation and the announcement of an annual scholarship in her name, October 16 was declared as a day to honor Rosa Parks during a rally in Atlanta's Central City Park, co-sponsored by the Emergency Land Fund and the Southern Regional Council. It was a part of Jane Fonda and Tom Hayden's speaking tour promoting the views of their anti-corporate and anti-nuclear Campaign for Economic Democracy (CED). The noonday event, which drew several thousand people, was held "to have the important issues of social change presented directly to the people of Atlanta and to cherish the presence of the South's number one citizen, Rosa Parks," according to Steve Suitts, SRC executive director.

In addressing the crowd, well-known activist and actress, Jane Fonda, said women are now the vanguard of social change, pulling back "the curtain of apathy" to work for "economic rights as well as civil rights." Fonda spoke of Rosa Parks' ongoing contribution to the civil rights movement as being an example of the innumerable women who have been a leading force in the struggle for equality and justice in this country.

On December 1, 1955, when a bus driver in Montgomery, Alabama, asked four Blacks to give up their seats to White passengers, one of the Blacks, Rosa Parks, refused. This courageous decision to stop obeying unjust laws prompted the formation of a year-long bus boycott by the

Montgomery Improvement Association with Martin Luther King, Jr. as its president.

Despite the many acts of violence directed at the Black community for the boycott, Parks stuck by her decision to challenge the racism of the law and on November 13, 1956, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that Montgomery's bus segregation laws were unconstitutional. The boycott marked the beginning of a new era of aggressive nonviolent action on the part of Southern Blacks.

Fonda also announced the establishment of a $5,000 annual college scholarship in Rosa Parks' name for the young Black Atlantan who demonstrated the most commitment for social activism during the previous year. The scholarship is being set up in conjunction with the National Committee for a Rosa Parks Shrine in Detroit, Michigan. Announcements for the application process will be sent to schools and civil rights groups in the near future.

The visit by Fonda and Hayden was designed to draw public attention to what they called the rapidly growing domination of American life by large corporations and the centralized nuclear power supply system. The Campaign for Economic Development is a brainchild of Hayden, 40, a founder of Students for a Democratic Society, a veteran of the anti-war movement and unsuccessful candidate in the 1976 United States Senate race in California.

In urging that economic rights be the next goal of activists, the couple said they found more and more female secretaries and clerical workers starting to "knock on doors" to organize for issues of economic democracy. In coming to the South, they said they wanted to honor the woman who started much of today's activism
