The Alabama legislature returned tc Montgomery on February 3rd to face critical budget problems which have been plaguing the state for years. Tax revenues earmarked for many functions of state government, especially the education system, are failing tc keep pace with inflation and Alabama's bare bones approach to government services is leading to drastic proposals tc cutback public assistance and sociai welfare programs.

Many Alabama agencies are facing

proration, or across the board percen

tage reductions, as revenue falls short

of expectations. Ironically, under present funding systems, Alabama Education Association must defend the earmarked sales tax revenues on whid the education budget depends against proposals to exempt food and drug items from the sales tax. Meanwhile, the state's income and property taxe5 remain very low compared to othei states.

With social programs already strug

gling to survive, Governor James ha announced a goal of identifying $45 million of "excess and waste" in the current year's budget in order to transfer monies to the State Department ol Corrections' expansion program. Jame hopes that program will convince the federal court to return the prison system to state control. such a transfex plan will be highly controversial, requiring legislative authorization.

Last year, the legislature agreed the

state needed $407 million from the general fund, yet could promise only 75 percent of that total, making $109 million of "conditional" appropriations. Recurring proration and increasing "conditional" appropriations-only rarely granted-point to a need for substantial reform in the taxation and finance system in Alabama.

In his "state of the state" address to

the legislature, however, James said no
new tax proposals were needed and that "the ship of state" was leaky with misused funds and earmarked monies. The governor is asking the legislature to unfreeze funds designated for specific purposes by legislation and to establish an election on a constitutional amendment to release monies earmarked in the state constitution.

If successful, James would unfreeze funds from the state income tax, license taxes, some sales taxes, and fines from state game and fish laws violations.

