'Legacy of Violence

Between 1882 and 1968. 4.743 Americans are known to have been victims of the terrible and violent crime of lynching. A.recent article in the Atlanta Journal Cozstitution defined the word lynching as "an illegal death at the hands of a group acting under pretense of service, race or tradition." More than 70 percent of those who lost their lives to a violent and unchecked mob in the name of preserving "tradition" were black. The allegations for which lynchings were .carried out include such shockingly. innocent acts as 'being obnoious,"" insolence," "trying to vote," "suing a white man," "frightening f white woman," and "acting suspiciously." The very word-lynching--was a feared and hateful term and it continues to strike fear ill many AfricanAmericans who can clearly remember acts of racial violence committed for breaches of "tradition.'

This brand oftelTorism enjoyed a perverse popularity especially in the seat of the former confederacy where four out of five lynchings occurred. Mississippi and Georgia sowed the most violence, recording more than five hundred lynchings each. Nearly 93 percent of lynchings in these' two states were committed against African-Americans. Texas ranks third with 493 lynchings.

\WThle many Ku Klux Klan branches helped perpetrate racia ed violent crimes against blacks that went Unpunished. c 1munity members colluded in, ways inCo1tpre heusible. Elected officials, newspaper editors, and law enforcement officials were involved in many of these vigilante murders. L0Qk carefully at the photograph on page 6. Countless community members ar(l entire families bear peculiar witness to the lynch mobsoffering-not in horror but in mutinous resentment and triumph. The' push forward, some perched on friends shoulders or in

 trees, to better view the mentally retardedseventeen-yearold Jesse Washington as his executioners repeatedly lowered him into the flames and lifted him out again; A postcard of white boys slouched around Washington's grotesquely charred and hanging corpse bears the chilling note, "This was the barheque we had last night ... .your son, Joe."

Emory University and the Martin Luther King,,Jr. National Historic Site are showing several images ofJesse Washington's lynching as part of a collectiOn' entitled, Without Sanctuary: Lynching Photography in America, a rare exhibition of photographs, postcards, and artifacts documenting the history of lynching in America. These brutal images are being seen for the fitst time in the south.

Deeply disturbing, these images communicate immediately with the viewer: you find yourself holding your breath and flinching involuntarily. As your body physically reacts, your heart and mind reflexively ask "'why such an exhibit?" James Jorddn, curator for Without Sanctuary offers a response. "I want this exhibit to challenge the sense of safety that comes with denial. I want it to trouble the waters .....so that the virulent and growing racism, nativisnl and antiimmigrant sentiment of today will be understood to 1e a dangerous vestige of the recent past."

In his article, "Return to Sender," authr Mat-Ic Auslnder adds his explanation. He describes the process leading up to the exhibit, including public forums that debated exhibit intent and how to exhibit this violent ithcnonienonithout wildin!Teparable harm.

Several communities devastated by white mob violence over the past century have begun to confront these painfullegacies of shared sufferingand destruction and are designing'actions for healing and reconciliation. "Lifting the Veil of Silence." workshop held in Atlanta last fall, brought nine of these communities together to liberate the ttuth about lynching. They feel an urgent need to "confront these atrocities against primarily AfricanAmerican citizens, resurrect and record this histoty, remember the dead, and begin to heal hese long neglected but still festering wounds" The , stories of se'eral of these communities are offered in this issue.

Confronting a "dangerous memory" is an appeal for coninlunity remembrance and 'reconciliation. Th

challenge offered by the Without Sanctuary exhibit and

tbse nine communities is a challenge we should all be 'willing to accept.

Congratulations to McWhorter

Diane McWhoi-ter gave the world something

memorable with her book Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Climatic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution. McW'horter uncovers the segregationist resistance ofbombers, Klansnian, and elected official,-,' in Birmingham during the Civii Rights Movement.. McWhorter's family and personal connections to the transforming and fateful events of Birmingham inspired her to 'write this important hook. Cariy Me Home recently won the Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction.This well deserved honor confirms the importance of McWhortr's topic and her considerable ability as an investigative journalist andautlior, Congratulations, Diane McWhorter. We thank you.

4 Wendy Johnson is executive director of the Southern

Regional ouncil. - -
"Return to Sender" 'Confronting Lynching and Our Haunted Landscapes

By Mark Auslander

last year, I took a walk in the woods with a friend, an African-American man in his fifties whom I will call "James" We had been seeking traces of an old slave cemetery, in which James had good reason to believe some of his ancestors were buried. Deep in the forest, he pointed out an old, gnarled oak that he was convinced marked the outer boundary of thegraveyard. Finding this aged landmark wasa relief, but a few minutes later, as we started back down the path, James paused and commented on the tree in different, more somber tones:

That tree 'Iltalk to you jfstandouthere in the dark. You'll heàrthatNegro clyingoutto you, man. can 'tyon hear?... Shoot. Look at that tree man. That's an ugly tree. You neversee limbs like that nowadays. That tree was bred for it. They just threw the rope up and pulled it up. Like this here, they just bring 'em here, hang 'em and throw 'em down in'that pit. Shoot. You think that tree don't know? Look at them limbs here. You don't see limbs growing down like that. There been some dead folk here.

The same tree that moments earlier had positively revealed to him one set of buried secrets, about an honored slave cemetery, becomes a (lark, ominous figure, hinting at nocturnal lynching parties.

A few weeks later, I found myself in conversation

with another friend, a man in his eighties whom I will

call "Daniel." He recalled a moment nearly eight decades earlier, when he was a six-year-old African-American boy in a small Georgia community. On a bridge, near the edge of town, while running an errand Saturday evening for his mother, he found himself surrounded by scores of hooded men robed in white, some atop white draped horses, all carrying flaming torches. He remembered his mother's frequent admonition: if you run from the Klan, you will (lie; they will shoot you down. Daniel froze, not even breathing, until a vaguely familiar voice from one of the masked figures, cackled, "Best get your black ass home, boy!" He ran home and held his mother all night long. "All my life." he says, "I've looked into the face of every white man in this county, in the store, at work, on the street. I ask myself, 'Is this him? Is this the 'man who saved my 'life and who left me half dead inside for years?' He haunts me still."

 These episodes are stark reminders that for many, the landscapes of Georgia, like many others across the nation, remain "haunt'ed," stalked by the remembered specters of racial violence, oppression, and hatred. As Martha, an elderly woman in Macon once told me, "every tree has a story." These stories ar often layered, ambivalently, with oscillating associations of profound belonging and orriflc exclusion. The same tree that might summon up nostalgic memories of rootworking or important moments in family history may also, moments later, trigger recollections of slavery, Klan rallies, o1 lynching. A face glimpsed in a store might one moment look benevolent, the next moment sinister.

For those influenced by the intellectual traditions of psychoanalysis, to speak of a person or a landscape as "haunted" is to imply that they are caught up i unresolved contradictions, in endurin traumas that, cannot be neatly classified as belonging to the "past." There are, to be sure, degrees of haunting. Some communities, families, and persons were vastly more traumatized than others, and some remain significantly more vulnerable to racial violence than others. Yet I would argue that the peculiar intimacy of systematic racialized violence in America, so often perpetrated by neighbor against neighbor, has rendered all of us, to some extent, "haunted," all stalked by the specters of the nation's under-acknowledged histories of terror within.

I found myself thinking: of these conversations last winter, as Emory University held a series of public forums around the question of lynching photographs. As has ben widely reported,Jarnes Allen and John Littlefleld have placed their collection of photographs and postcardoHynching and racial violence, primarily taken between 1880 and 1920. on long-term loan in Emory's Special Collections. These images have been published in theextraordinary book, Without Sanctuary, . displayed on the web (ww.withoutsanctuary.com) and exhibited in New York City and in Pittsburgh. Yet the images had never been displayed in a large-scale exhibition in the American South.

Should the photographs be displayed here, and if so, how? These questions were debated in public sessions on. the Emory. campus and at, the Auburn Avenue Research Library on AfricanAmerican History and Culture, and by a University task force of faculty, students, and staff members. Many noted that the images were initially produced and
;circulated as jnslnniients of terror: dismembered, horrifically dismembered bodies were carefully posed, often surrounded by smiling, triumphant crowds. Would exhibiting these images of unspeakably violent death occasion a kind of pornographic voyeurism? Would modern onlookers, in effect, occupy the same position as the gleeful onlookers in the pictures? Would an exhibition inadvertently reduce those killed. nearly all of them African-American, to passive, pitiful objects of morbid curiosity? Or, as many Maintained. would seeing these images finally force thousands of viewers to confront a historical truth that they had never before truly grasped, that lynching was not an occasional aberration, but

was rather a mass phenomenon, a pervasive spectacle of violence, an inescapable chapter in the American story?

In the middle of one of these forums, a voting woman rose to speak. She had been of two minds about the show, she acklowledged. She knew that these images, many of them photographic postcards, had been sent through the

m*1 'it pat  I

al I I to sow te,rror in the h'arts of Afi'ican;Aiericans who might glimpse them. There was always the risk that displaying these pictures might again inflict pai and

fear on some viewers. Yet, she mused, doesn't this exhibi-tion offer us the opportunity to redirect these inlages, to circulate them along a different trajectoi-v,to mark them, in effect, "return to sender?  -

The phrase, "return to sender, has stayed with me ever since. No exhibition or project can, or should, elrase

,James or Daniel's memories. or the memories of 111(i-sands of others haunted by tl e echoes f Americas long

 undeclared war against person,, of color. Yet might new

initiatives, in mu sen ms or, other public spaces, h rip HS-Collectively Confront our inner (1(111 ons and move us bevon (I the timeless i'ep t ii ion of Iran i na? Might there he ways to take these lingering specters and mark them, once mid for all, "return to sender?

It was in this spirit last year that a group of ii s at Fmoi* began to work closely with our partners ini nearby Organization, Ihe Moore's Ford Memorial Committee (MI'mc),

a group formed in the niid-1990s to publicize and Corn-in(,niot'ate the killing in July 1946 of four young African Americans, -including one returning serviceman, near Monroe. Georgia. Since its fotinding the MFMC has deuiionstraied a remarkable ability to bring logethervarmd constituencies, across lines of race and class, to work on

projects of memorial ization and social justice. As an anthropologist who studies ritual I've been epeçiallv fascinated by the work the MFMC has done incieaning and restoring the cemeteries in which the victims of the Moore's Ford killings had been buried in unmarked graves. Coniniunitv attempts to mark the graves with permanent markers were repeatedly sabotaged by Klan members. In jarñes Alien's memorable phrase,. even in death the victims were "without sanctuarv.

In this context, the work_of restoring cemeteries strikes me as especially irnpoInI. One night in the summer, of ltt( a group of men gathered 'to commit an unspeakable crime, riddling tile bodies of theirvoungviciims with hundi'ecls of bullet holes. on successive weekends, a group of people from varied hackgrnundsgathei'ed to participate ill the hard, physical labor of restoring hallowed "round.111 a quiet fah ion they sought to honor that which had been (lisllonorect to sanctify those long denied sanctuary. In the words (>l one MFMC activis, "sweat-prodi icing Jabor is soul-cleansing labor." If tIi' bodies of the dead had been physically "dis-memberedr' by the murdet-ers, then the modern cemetery work sought to 'h'e-menihei" those who were lost, and by extension q) 're-member econstitnte a shattered community. Sinc

time immemoriaL ri uals-especiallv rites niarkingcycles

of death and the regeneration of life-have bound together

vijiages, conininnifies, and nations. It is moving to watch such ritual practices emerging at this historical junctur, across the country at the grassroots level, a's diverse persons and families seek new ways to meet on

)t1lfllOfl ground. -
Over the course of spring 2000. we began to plan for a collaborative workshop that would bring together representatives of the many different community organizations around the nation doing comparable work, seeking to bring out the truth about lynching and "re-member" their local communities. Funded by a grant from the Georgia Humanities Council, the workshop was cosponsored by the MFMC, Emory University's Center for Myth and Ritual in American Life (MARIAL) and the Auburn Avenue Research Library. We held the program, "Lifting the Veil of Silence: A Workshop on Racial Violence and Reconciliation" at Auburn Avenue on October 2425, 2001.

For two days, representatives of nine different cornñiunty organizations shared their stories. We heard in painful detail narratives of mass violence in Tulsa, Oklahoma and Rosewood, Florida in which entire communities had been devastated in theearly 20th century. We learned new details of the killings in Chattanooga, Tennessee; Duluth, Minnesota: Monroe, . Georgia; Ocoee, Florida; Orangehurg, South Carolina; Price, Utah; and Wilmington, North Carolina. In plenary and in small break-out sessions we pondered and debated the causes, meanings, and legacies of these events. What does it mean to tell the truth, and who, if anyone, owns the "rights" to these stories? Who is accountable for these crimes and what forms should accountability take? Is reconciliation possible without justice, in the absence of prosecution or formal judicial inquiry? What form would a South African-style "Truth and

Reconciliation Commission" take in' Georgia? How might the historical analysis of lynching productively inform current activism around issues of incarceration, the death penalty, poverty, and racial violence?

Again and again, we returned to the problem of what Toni Morrison has termed "re-memory," the imaginative work of telling stories that had seemed lost, and in so doing, of recreating moral and community bond,, long frayed. What kinds o1 memorials are the most tittingt() those killed i such terrible

ways? How (10 We honor the victims without reducing them, and by extension all oppressed persons and communities, to the status of mere objects of pity? How (10 we move beyond simply re-affirming the relations of power, terror, and domination that we-re reflected by, and reproduced through, the initial acts of lynching? How, in short, (10 we make things different?

I'orJosephJordan, curator of the current exhibition of the Allen-Littlefield lynching photographs at the Martin

Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site (open May 1-December 31, 2002) the answer lies in giving voice to those whose voices were so long ignored. He opened the workshop by reading from the testimony of James Cameron, who narrowly survived a lynching in1930. "How did I act when it came time for me to die?" he read. With those startling words, the line between distant victim and audience member was suddenly blurred. Such language breaks down the abstraction of statistical enumeration. Some of us were reminded of a rabbi's commentary on September 11: it wasn't five thousand people who died in the World Trade Center. It was one person, five thousand times.

For activists from Duluth, Minnesota, commemorating the 1920 killings of three young èircus workers by a crowd of five thousand persons, the answer lies in mass, collective action. The photographs, of the 1yncHd Elias Clayton, ElmerJackson,and Isaac McGhie ar-tuiiong the most haunting in the Without Sanctuary c1ection. Two youths, their shirts stripped off, -are trussed from either
side of a lamp-post. A third young victim lies prone at their feet. An exultant white crowd surrounds them. The parallels in composition to classic images of the Crucifixion almost defy understanding; even the ribs of one youth are visible, a (lark shadow at their base. At some unconscious level, did the photographer understand that he was complicit in another Calvary? African-American artists and poets have long noted parallels between lynching and GoIgotha (In Gwendolyn Brooks' words, "The lariat lynch-wish 1 deplored/The loveliest lynchee vas our Lord.") Recentl, scholar such as Orlando Patterson and I)onakl Mathews have argued that lynchings were often organized around the logi of ritual sacrifice and expiation; overtly or implicitly, the killerssought communion through the blood of the offered scapegoat.

The enduring power of these nightmarish images has posed a special challenge for the modern activists in Duluth. At first, they planned, to commemorate the 1920 event through an image of a lamppot, to he used on posters and T-shirts. Yet, to some, the icon seemed too much like the old photographs; even the stark lines of the curved lamppost onjureci up the traces 01 the desecrated bodies. A local artist finally hit upon an ingenious solution: the nv image depicts the silhouetted figures of the three young men, standing -straight and tall; hacklit hy,the glow of a distant light source. In a subtle fashion, the street lam!) ha

been transformed from an-insunient of terror to something else: the light of historical truth, perhaps, or even the ultimate promise of redemption. Images surel haunt us. Yet they also, in quiet ways, may hell) to heal us.

This summer, on the anniversary qf the 192() lynching, the Duluth organizers plan to turn the tables even more thoroughly. Ten thousand persons-twice the

 numbers who participated in the killing-will gather on the

spot of the murder for a collective memorial. The photographs of that event, I expect, will he worth seeing.

On the final (lay of our workshop in October we held a modest memorial ritual of our own. Activists and scholars from around the nation gathered on a Sunday morning by the banks of the Appalachee River, at the little , crossing known as "Moore's Ford," where George and Mae Murray I)orsey and Roger and Dorothy Malcolm were killed on July 25, 1946 by a group of white men, none of whom were ever prosecuted. One at a time, members of MFMC and students from the college where I teach quietly read the names of the 488 persons known to have been lynched in Georgia. Each name was precious, and yet there was a special ppgnancy to a phrase that recurred again and again, "Unknown Negro... Unknown Negro.' Lynching snuffed out thousands of lives before their time, and even erased, in some instances, the identities of the (lead for all time.

James, who grew up hearing whispered stories of the Moore's Ford killings, was at church that morning and couldn't make it to the memorial service. But he heard about it fronisome mutual friends and has talked about it a few times since. As an "old time civil rights aivist," he-says he's lately been close to giving up on the current generation of young people. But gazing at photographs of the students at the 'Ceremony he allows that there might be some hope after all. Remarking at the racial mix in the photographs, ofAfrican-American, Latino, White and Asian students, he wonders. "Who knows what they'll get up to?"

Recently, James and I took another walk in the woods. Once more, we passed that old oak.Thinking of our earlier conversation, I asked him if he found this sight disturbing. He shook hishead, puzzled: "Hey, it's just a tree." Freud. I suspect, would be pleased: sometimes a treeis only a tree.

Of course, many might argue that in the shadow of America's violent history against its own citi71enspf color, a single workshop, a single memorial service, or single exhibition of photographs won't change '.anything fundamentally. Aren't these just symbols, images, ephemeral traces of light and shadow?

Yet when traversing haunted landscapes, light and shadow are, sometimes, the only thing's with which we have t work. I take some comfort from the thought that the exhibition of lynching photographs 'oi5ened in Atlanta, capital of the: "New South," on May 1st, of all days. Mayday. Once an ancient rite celebrating the -land's regeneration on the (lay of spring's retuin, now dedicated internationally to the dignity of labor and to our common humanity. What better day to bring some old images of (lark times out into the light and stamp them, once and for all, 'returned to sender"?

Mark Auslander teaches Anthropology tnd Sociology at Oxford College of Emoiy University and is a core faculty, member at tl E;noiy Center for Myth and Ritual in American Life (the MARJAI, Center.). With Rich Rush of Moore's Ford Memorial Committee, he served as.co-coordinator of Lifting the Veil of Silence: A Workshop on Racial Violence and Reconciliation.

For more infi,rrnatwn about the Moore's Ford Memorial Committee, visit: wwwmoor?sford.net email:

richrusk@negianet or write to.- 1851 Rays Church Road, Bishop, GA 30621-1206. -

The Without Sanctuary exhibit is housed at the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site in Atlanta, Georgia, from May I through December 3l,2002. For more information on the exhibit and accompanying community events, visit. www nps.gov/malu
Communities Lifting the Veil of Silence

The 1898 Foundation, Wilmington, NC

During Reconstruction, sonic African-Americans in Wilmington, North Carolina were able to achieve a degree of financial and professional success. In 1897, more than 13 percent of businesses were black-owned. The political success of the Populist party helped t boost several black residents into low-level political appointments and municipal jobs, angering many whites. White Democrats

"rallied to reclaim political power, circulating racist propaganda andcharging that black men were a sexual threat to white women. Alex Manly. African-American editor of The Daily Record in Wilmington, responded by sitggestingthat some ofthe alleged "rapes were consensual relationships.

When the votes on November 8, 1898 were tallied, the victorious white Democrats in Wilmington adopted the :91ite Man's Declaration of Independence," resolving that 'black officeholding was "unnatuial,'1hat the city administraton should resign, and that Alex Manly be banished. Prominent white citizens-presented the Declaration to the black community, ordering a response by the following clay. The next (lay, a mob of angry, armed white men destroyed the Daily Record office, placed a bounty on Manly's head, and instigated the Riot of 1898, one of the worst racially and politically motivated episodes in American history. Homes and churches were damaged, businesses were destroyed, and the Republican officials were forced to resign.

Recently, Wilmington residents are memorializing the not with a 'monument honoring the achievements of African Americans and other Wilmingtonians who fought for civil rights in the 20th century. The memorial will be located in the 1898 Memorial Park, close to the spot where the riot he"gan in 1898. A fundraising campaign is underway. For more information about the Riot and the 1898 Foundation, visit www.spinnc.org/spinsi/898n'iemorial.

 Moore's Ford Memorial Committee Monroe, GA

On July 25, 1946, twelve to fifteen unmasked white men shot George and Mae Murray Dorsey and Roger and Dorothy Malcolm, all African-American, hundreds of times in broad daylight at Moore's Ford bridge. No one was ever prosecuted for these murders. Civil rights activists and the Walton County NAACP formed the Moore's Ford Memo-. rial Committee in August 1997. This large biracial group of Georgians seek to tell the story of the, murders of the Dorseys and the Malcoims and to create a permanent

living memorial. Several hundred Georgians searched for the missing graves of the lynching victims. Finding three of the four, they worked twenty-five days to restore two cemeteries and installed grave niofmmentsat the gravesites. A military service on Memorial Day honored World War II veteran George I)orsey who was killed nine months after returning front the Pacific. MFMC's efforts also led to Lunar Howard, who was beaten after testifying.before an Athens grand jury on the 1946 killihgs, being honored with a Georgia House of Representatives resQlution commemorating hiscourage. The group offers annual scholarships to local students who have learned of the lynching and chatl a course seeking justice an racial reconciliation: To 'learn, more about MFMC, visit: www:mooresford.net.

The Ocoee Projec/Ocoee, FL

On November 2, 1920-Election Day-Julius Perry was dragged from his house in Ocoee by a group of whites and hanged, his body riddled with bullets. At least five other local AfricanAmericans were also either shot or. burned that night and an entire black neighborhood,, including at least twenty-four homes, two churches, a school, and a lodge, was burned. Why? Because AfricanAmericans had sought to vote that day.

The Republican Party had conducted extensive voter registration drives throughout the South that year. Perry and Moses Norman, ancither prominent local AfricanAmerican, had been actively recruiting blacks to register and vote. When Norman was refused at tl'e polls, whites searched his car and found a gun. Norman was beaten, but escaped. When armed local whites, believing a "black uprising" was und?rway, searched for him at Perry's home, shots were fired, and two white men were killed. Perry was then dragged from his home and killed.

The grand jury that followed exonerated all who were involved. Soon after, local whites ran the entire black population, including successful farmers, out of Ocoee, offering them token payments for their land. According to the 1920 Census, prior to the murders and rioting, blacks comprised almost 50 percent of the Ocoee population. Only two black residents were 'listed in the 1930 Census. Eighty years later, blacksaccounted fronly 2 percent of the population.

The Ocoee Project is' multiracial grassroots initiative that was formed to Unearth the hidden history of devastation of Ocoee's black community in 1920 and to
spur the Central Florkkr community to take steps toward accountability. The Ocoee Project is working to post exhibits in local and state museums, unveil a memorial to the victims of the Ocoee Massacre, have information about the massacre included in Florida school curricula, and have reparations awarded to the descendants of those who lost their lives and their land.

Rosewood Heritage Foundation Rosewood, FL

On January 1, 1923. Fannie Taylor said that a black man attacked herat home while her husband was working: The next day, a mob lynched Sam Carter, a blacksmith and outstandingcitizen and resident of Rosewood, Florida. The mob continued to rage anti by January 4th, they had burned cabins and houses near Rosewood and shot and killed Sara Carrier in her home. On January 6th, several children and women, who had been hiding in a well and nearby forests, were able to escape by train. The Florida Grand jury, when it met the next month, found "insufficient evidence" to prosecute anyone for the Rosewood Riot and Massacre.

The story of this racist riot remained buried for nearly sixty years until reporter Gary Moore published the story

in the St. Petersburg Times. Survivors and their: family memh-s soon after founded the Rosewood Family Reunion in Lacoochee, . Florida. In .1994, the former African-American residents of Rosewood and their family members 'became the recipients of the first restitution payments for a racial riot. The state paid $150,000 to each survivor añd the Rosewood Scholarship Fund, was established.

Since that time, survivors and their family members have been working to educate others about the events of the Rosewood Massacre and their relation to racial justice in the United States. Rosewood Bus Tours has carried more than 7,300 student, military group, family, church, and comniunitygroupss on an educational journey through Rosewood. With Florida Humanities Council funáing,he Rosewod Tlaveling Exhibit was designed. And "Rosewood," produced by Warner Brothers was released in 1997, providing a Hollywood version of the story to a broad national audience. To learn more about the Rosewood Heritage Foundation, visit: ww.displaysforschools.com

 rosewood.html.

M arge B aro ni: The . Awakening of Activism

.by Susan Stevenot Sullivan

Marjorie Rushing Baroni (1942-1986) was in many ways an ordinary Southern woman of the last century. A housewife and resident of Natchez, Mississippi, she was neither wealthy nor famous. She was not killed in-the civil rights days, nor were members of her family. She was willing, however, to live what-she believed about the dignity of all people. She was an ordinary person who took an extraordinary stance for her time and paid a social and personal price for the rest of her life.

The (laughter of poor, white, Mississippi sharecroppers and he mother of six children, Marge Baroni departed from her cultural upbringing to become a civil rights activist in one of the most active Ku Klux Klan areas in Mississippi. By living her faith in God's equal love for all races, she endangered herself and her family and was ostracized by white society-including relatives, friends, co-workers, and members of her Catholic Parish.

Books like Local People: The Struggle for Civil Rights

in Mississippi by John I)ittmer; Silver Rights by ConstanceCurry; and Civil Rights Chronicle by Clarice Campbell testify to the heroic actions of ordinary people who have helped transform life as it is 110W lived in the United States. The,acrifices f such people, many acting in isolation and in the face overwhelming pressure to be silent and conform, helped to construct platforms upon which the highly-' publicized people and events featured in history books have stood. These stories bring us history with flesh and bone, with feelings and particularity

The central mystery for all such ordinary, extraordinary lives is "how" and "why." How is it that Mrs. Baroni stepped-out despite the risks involved, to live her belief that all people are equal n the sight of God? Why did she persist,, risking her life and the lives of those she loved?

The clues are in her life and her writings. They are uncovered in the remembrances of friends, family members, civil rights co-workers, And in the recorded histhry of the South. This article is a first attempt to scratch the surface of the mystery of Marjorie Rushing Baroni's life:.
)

The Commerce of Natchez.

ftc world into wli icli Mai'ge Baroni was born had

been built. Iongbefore, on the backs of slaves. Accordingto

Ronald L.F. Davis. in Jize Black Krperieizce in Natcliez 1720

1S80, by the 1790,; slaves were arriving in Natchez in increasing numbers. He writes. "With the developnientof the Cotton gin, I lie trickle of slaves coming ut ( ) the neighborhood becuiie a cascade. By 1810, more than ,000 laves lived in Adams Cotintv. . - Ihat number inCl'('ised to

292 on the eve of the Civil War... TRe old Nalcliez

(listflct had become a slave-populated, plantation economy.

lh is plantation economy led to the erection 01 nit merotis estate mansions ill and around Naichez. Davis describes the econ on] i impact of slave labor in Natchez: ''itudentsofNatchezliistorvcontend that district planters m ked ann)] ig the richest slave masters in the Soul ii as well as-in nianv cases-the nations wealthiest citizens."

As generations passed, the trappings of slavery were

(ii scai'ded , but the system of seco d-ciass stains remained.

I )escri hi ii g the ev U I ioi i

of 20111 cet tn rv race rela

tion,, in Natchez, Joint

Ititinter in Local People

wrote:

'Tcforc World War II. rate relations in

\ at ch ez resembled the paternal isni of the old

regime, with orgtn lion--, like the NAACP

tolerated as long as blacks

did not challenge -the caste svsteiii. Now, however, Natchex had become a 'New' bout h' city h )aSti ig an in du stnai base anchored by Armstrong Tire and Rubber, the Inlet-national Paper Conipany, and the ,lohns-Manville

 Corporation. \Vlien in the early 1960s black activists began

to press for social change, whites responded as they had

(luring the days of first Reconstruction. With a substantial

white working-class base, the Ku Klux Klan, under the leadership of E.. L. McDaniel, was strongerin Natchez than in any other Mississippi community, even McConll)."

Childhood Challenges

Marjorie Raye Rushing was horn August 16, 1924, to Percy Rushing and Clementine Loften Rushing. Margie, the oldest of their five children, was born in Brookhaven,

just outside Naichez, on a farm the couple sharecropped.

One of Marge Baronis daughters, Mary Jane (Baroni) larver said that her mother's family had a "hard life," Problems between her grandfather, an often-violent alcoholic. and liergiandmothei-. a "hard-shell Baptist," created turmoil for the children in addition to the economic challenges.

In an essay entitled, "Whatever Happened to Joseph

Ed wards, "probably written in the 1980s as the start of her, unfinished master's thesis, Baroni wrote about her upbringing. "When I was growing up, my father moved us often. He was always looking for-the poi of gold at the end of the rainbow. We lived in a succession of rental houses in Natchez and in a number of tenant shacks on various flu-ms in Adams County."

While her hands becanie call used front months of hard, hot labor. Margie Rushing escaped into her fluid iniagmation . "Mv brother and I; as the eldest Children in the family-we were eleven and thirteen i-especiivelvwere expected to (10 the work of liu'ni hands, and we did, I

renmeniher picking cottoil, sticking sweet potato slips into the ground, laying stalks of seed cane along the furrow our

them' ploughed ]'of

them... It was a hard life at times, especially loran adolescent, but in the hot d avs between the laying of the crops and harvest time. I was able to i'ead for many bout's. I always (lIv dreamed, no matter what the chore, and had to be i'epriniandt'd often.

- At the age of fln'tv

nine, Marge Baroni recalled the childhood foundations of hempro profound search for

meaning and love,

"I have wanted, so intensely all lily life, to live fully. Lying on my hack in the piddle of the peanut patch

looking at the September clouds and Wondering what the

future held for me... I was -twelve years old, a dreamer,

romantic, and irrepressible.

The stress inflicted by her dysfunctional family added urgency to the search fortranscendence and new perspectives aniid the daily (hifficulties. It niay also have created a sense of solidarity with those targeted by rage-filled

abusers who need scapegoats. -
"I knew a little about corporal punishment," she continued. "We always told each other, 'You're going to get a whipping.' I think I got the most. For one thing I was the oldest of five children and niy brother, next to me, was the only son. This automatically acted in his favor .... The sense of disapproval, the tension and violence, hysteria and clenched teeth that enlanal('d froni my parents unhappiness with each other kept my core from forming unscalTed.

At any rate it is this spirit of exploration that has motivated my enqre life. This and the search forevkk'nces )f love-the lovjbf man for man, for woman, for child, for earth, for every rowing thing, evey created thing... even

now the pattern is still growing, it is still becoming-dearer."

The pattern of noticing a difference in the way certain people were treated niay have started in the immediate family, with her brother, but it soon widened to include the hu-ger community.

In "WhateverHappcne(l to.Ioseph E'dwards," she wrote about hergrowing awareness ofinequality. "1 knew, when I was a little girl, that something. stood in the way of free interco)jrse among people. Before hecognizecl differences in skin pigment and came to know what it meant. I knew there was a harrier. I had noted the high, strained pitch of the shopkeeper's voice when he spoke to a black custonier ln the department stores I had seen handsome, dark women poised and austere, their faces closed against

the loud questioning of the clerks  Although my

moth'r never jerke me closer to her when we met blacks an the street, as she did when we passed the Chinese family who ran the grocery store clown on Franklin Street. I could telere was a special etiquette in her conversation with black men and women-even children. She became jocularly condescending, not natural as he when she was among her white friends and relatives."

 Leaving Natchez High School bef ore she graduated. \'Iarge niarnecl nineteen-year-okj Louis Baroni, the son of In Italian sharecropper family who lived in Aclai County. She was seventeen. Louis and Marge relocated as. he searched for ivf'lcling work in booming shipyards ofWorlcl War II. The first of their six children, Neil, was born within i ''ear. According to Louis. Marge insisted on returning to 'atchez-for the birth of their first child in August of 1942. fhe couple would live in Natchez for the rest of Marge's ife.

Thr Awakening of Activism

A process of personal transformation led to Marge's conversion to Catholicism in 1947. By the mid-1950s, she

ecame a friend of internationally-known peace and justice

iclivist. Dorothy Day, also a Catholic. More than two de-cades of correl)ondlenc(' and visits testify to a mother

daughter sort of relationship between the two women. The

relationship influenced Marge's activism.

By 1957, Marge stopped attending local concerts and theater e'lents, which she loved and reviewed for the local paper. "The fact that (concerts and plays) were segregated became too much for me." she wrote. "What was I doing there? How could I justify my belief in the fatherhood of God and the hroiherhobd of man if I had no qualms about enjoying privilege because of the color of my skin?"

By 1962, Mm-ge Baroni quit heIoh as-an editor of the Natclzez Daily Democrat, because of their racist editorial policies. She informed her employer. "I Could no longer work for a newspaper that purposely overlooked one-half the population, unless there was a murder, rape, or robbery implicating a member of that community."

She began a public involvement in anti-segregation and

civil rights organizations, such as the Mississippi Council

on Human Relations. During this decade she established important relationships with such local activists as Father William Morrissey, a,Iosephite priest and the white pastor of the black Catholic church in Natchez, and others such. as Mamie Lee Mazique, activist and member of the parish. The courageous stories of these local people are' intertwined with her own. Like them. Marge felt compelled to

conform her life to her beliefs, whatever the cost. In a 1977 oral historvinteryiew, Marge remarked,on

the challenge of integrity.-The thing is, it was perfectly

acceptable for white people to sit down and talk about how black people were mistreated, So long as one didn't (10 anything about it, so long as one didn't attempt to-change it. You could deplore it. You could he upset about it. You could say it was wrong. You could point to the Bible... You could read the Bible and study your religion, but you couldn't practice it."

For Marge. Mississippi's litany of beatings and murders, legal challenges, and years of struggle 1l'coaIesced in the summer of. 1964, Freedom Summer. Scores of students poured into Mississippi, as she put it, "to-help break the hods under which black Mississippians labored... It was the beginning of the end for the old Mississip -

Never before had it been so blatantly. obvious that church., stale, ancliocal ovei-nments, educational and press organ izations,nd business institutions were dedicated in our state to the status quo based on separation of the races. Thi9 condition had existed in every area of life since the, territory was first settled by the white man, and the land

hi-ought under control by his black slave."

Her activities in 1964 in4ided integrating the white library in Natchez with Chock Ma'zique, Maniie Lee Mazique's son: attending Civil Rights Commission hearngs: joininM the Mississippi Council on Human Relations, which was meeting at Tougaloo College where she met
Mickey Schwerner a month before he was murdered: and meeting at Natchez's Eola Hotel to help integrate the dining room.

Ostracism and Threats

By December of 1964. her efforts triggered ostracism, first by extended family members, then by white Catholic parishioners and the white community as a whole. KKK smear campaigns and threats became common. Al least one bombing attempt targeting the family home is acknowledged and shots were fired at the house. "We were always concerned about bombings," Louis Baroni, her husband, said in an oral history interview in 200(at his Imme on Monroe Street.

Louis Raroni who worked at the same Armstrong Ølant as bombing victim Wharlest Jackson,went in fear of his life for years. Each 'ening he inspected small pebbles he had placed on the hood of his car at the beginning of the shift, in the hope of detecting the tampering necessary to place a siniihir bomb in his car, ready to detonate on the drive home from work. For three years, no one at the Armstrong plant spoke to Louis Baroni. He may have kept his job clue to his union membership.

In rcent oral history interviews, it is clear that the Baronj offspring are, decades later, beginning to come to grips with the impact of these events on their childhoods. Their experiences vary with their ages at the time of the most harrowing events. Some of the younger children were taunted and insulted at times and all were conscious of the family's isolation and being "different."

Despite the impact on the children, their mother did not change her beliefs or her activities. Marge Baroni helped spearhead a drive to fori the Adams Jefferson County, Iniprovement Corporation (Pd IC), a communityaction agency conforming to Title H of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964-pioneering outreach efforts included Head Start, high school work programs, and adult literacy programs.

 In 1969, Marge left her post as assistant director of AJIC to accept a job as an aide to Mayor Charles Evers of Fayette, the first African-American to he elected mayor of a biracial town in Mississippi since Reconstruction. She worked for him for ten years.

The ostracism continued long after the defining years of the Civil Rights Movement ended. The isolation took an emotional and physical toll, which she candidly revealed in correspondence. It is possible that she suffered a nervous breakdown in the early 1970s. She went away for several weeks and two of her sons remember there was uncertainty about whether she would return. She did.

Dorothy Day, her friend and mentor, died in 1980. In 1981, Marge Baroni was'diagnosed with colon cancer, a

struggle which ended with her death in 1986.

Until the end, she continued her vocation as an activist. Several months before her death, an emaciated Marge Baroni was featured in an article in the weekly paper of the Catholic Diocese of Jackson. The story detailed her work to secure housing for a one hundred-year-old AfricanAmerican woman.

-

Questions Remain

Who was Marge Baroni? Much more research is needed to answer that question. She was one of the very. human, very ordinary people who took extraordinary risks. Much more of her story, and the stories of people like Father William Morrissey and Mamie Lee Mazique, remains to be told.

Perhaps history is made and hearts are-changed one ordinary person at a time. To follow their exnhI)le, we need to know who they are. "Who our heroes are and whether they are presented in -a way that makes them lifelike, hence usable as role models, could have a significant bearing on our conduct in theworld," writesJames W. Loewen in Lies My Teacher Told Me: Evei'thing Your American History Textbook Got Wrong.

Attempting to understand how Marge Baroni, and others,joined this company of extraordinary/ordinary people can help all of us see our own roles more dearly in the challenges that continue today.

A note from Dorothy Day in November of 1974 reads, "Dearest Marge, (10 excuse my long silence-hut I've been -thinking of you and our plans for the South-a farm in Mississippi somewhere between Natcher and Fayette. Idle dreams maybe but your energies and desires to serve the Lord, your love of people and interracial justice should

find expression  You have been a voice in the wilderness

and a sjiining light to the blind!"

Susan Stevenot Sullivan lives in Atlanta, working as a writer and photographer with groups in ministry in the South. She was instrumental in the placement of Marge Baroni's papers in the archives at the University of Mississippi.

Sullivan continues to piece together Marge Baroni's story and would appreciate hearing from anyone who can add additional information (write to Susan Stevenot Sulliva

c/o Southern CFanges at 133 Carnegie Way, NW, Suite 900, Atlanta, GA 30303)
Race and Redistricting: Myths, Truths, and Facts

ByTodd A. Cox

- Federal court decisions regarding redistricting over the past several years have caused some to question how district line drawers can create redistricting plans that will provide all voters equal opportunity to elect candidates of choice. Since Shaw v. Reno, the courts have clarified the criteria for drawing district lines and made it clear that'race can he a factor in redistricting and these clarifications have supported lawmakers and grassroots organizers who sought redistricting plans that allow fair representation for minorities in many states and localitiessince 2000.

But, the process of redistricting is not complete throughout the South. States like Louisiana and Noth Carolina are still developing plans and; more importantly, countless communities across the South have yet to draw new city council, county commissioner, and school board plans. For this reason, it is imperative that local activists supporting fair representation for minorities are well informed of the role which rate may play in redistricting. Line drawers may still try to argue against creating districts that fairly reflect minority voting strength. These arguments will essentially bebased on myths about the role of raie in redistricting. In order to advocatelor the creation of fair redistricting plans, be prepared to debunk these myths.

Myth: Racecannot be considered during redistricting.

Truth: It is okay to be conscious of race (luring redistricting. It is, however, important tqavoid violating "trditional redistricting principles."These include: rnakingsure thai the districts are compact and contiguous (ensuring that all parts of the district touch); respecting political subdivisions; and preserving communities of interest.

 States and local jurisdictions are l)elillitted.to express and me t political oals even if the result is the creation of majority-minority districts. Hunt v. Crornartie, issued. in April 2001. is the latest word from the U. S. Supreme Court on the role of race and politics-in redistricting. lnthat case, a grout) of white voters sought to have. North Carolina's new 12th and 1st Congressional Districts ruled unconstitu

• tional racial gerrynihndes. The Suprn]e Court. however, found the 12th District constitutional. The Court pointed out that the North Carolina General Assembly simply sought tokreate a district containing very loyal Democratic voters and in so doing created a district that had a large concentration ofAfrican-Americans who tend to vote I)emocratic,'writing, "A legislature trying to secure a safe I),eniocratic seatis interested in Democraticyoting behavior.

Hence, a legislature may, by placing reliable Democratic

precincts within, a district without regard to race, end up

with a district contain ing more heavily African-American precincts, but the reasons would he political rather than racial."

Myth: Jurisdictions are not required or permitted to create majority-minority districts.

Truth: Jurisdictions are permitted and may even be ,required to create majority-minority districts. Those drawing lines during the redistricting process are required to comply with Sction 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 which forbids the adoption of redistricting plans that have the result of denying voters an equal opportunity to participate in the poth cal process because of their race, color, or membership in a language minority group. Those drawing lines must avoid creating redistricting plans that result in diluting the voting strength of minority voters., Dilution occurs when concentrated minority populations are fragmented or split between districts orover-concentrated in a district, resulting in minority voters having less of an opportunity to elect their candidgteofchoicèthan other voters.

Despite the requirement that line drawers not dilute minority voting strength, some individuals and groups may still advocate for dismantling a majority-niinority district and spreading its voters between various districts in order to achieve some partisan political advantage. The determination of whether a particular redistricting plan violates Section 2 is very complicated and specific to the area being examined. It requires complex political and social science analyses of electoral behavior and of a community's political history. Without this analysis, it would be inappropriate for those drawing district lines td dismantle majorityminority districts or fail to create them merely based, for example, on anecdotal informati6n-of minority elector-al. victories or hypothetical promises of future success.

Myth: The redistricting process is closed to the4ublic.

Truth: Redistricting should be an open process. The redistricting process is open for participation by anyone, including individuals and grassroots organizations.

To get involved, first, eduate yourself about the redistricting process in your state and community. Find out the redistricting schedule, the timing for hearings and devl.oping plans, and howyou can participate.You should get a coy of any proposed redistricting plans from the body charged wititredistricting, n yourcothrnunity and find out if the state or local government will provide the public access to redistricting computers so that you may develop your own alternative plans. Also, you should familiariie yours( If with the census population data foryour community, evalu

•ating population characteristics and assessingthe various demographic trends that have developed over the last
decade. This data i available from various sources, II1iI(l

ing the J.S. Census Bureau.

Second, assemble the information you need to make

your case for a fair redistricting plan and share it with redistricting officials. Make sure information proving the need for the creation of a particular majority-minority district is included in the redistricting record. This can take the form of letter,,-, public hearing testimonials, studies, reports, articles, or ((pert analyses and should include:

'maps showing that reasonably compact majorityminority (I istricts can be drawn;

• an exqmination of whethervoting is racially polarized in

votu comniunitv;

• an assessnient of the history of discrimination in your

Coil) mUnity andin the state, particularly to voting:

• a list of current electoral practices that have a

discriminatory impact on the ability ofminorities tocast

an effective vote:

• an assessment of the extent to which minority candidates are excluded from nominating processes:

• an assessnmnt of the social and economic disparities between initjorities and whites in your community and the state in areas such as,e(lucation, employment, and health:

• examples of overt or subtle appeals to or reference to race that have been made in elections:

• a record of the electoral successes and losses suffered

by candidates of choite of minority voters;

• thelack of responsiveness of the governing body being redistricted to the needs 01 the minority community: and

• an assessment of flow insubstantial ajurisdiction'spolicy reason may he for not creating majority-minority districts and maintaining tile current-plall.

Third, some jurisdictions-including many in the

Sotith-are required to submit their redistricting plans to the federal government for review under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965- Under Section 5. certain jurisdictions with a history of discrimination in voting ("covered jurisdiction,,,") must submit any changes in law that could affect voting, such as redistricting plans, to either the I)epartnient of Justice (I)0j) or the federal district court in the I)istrict of Columbia for review to make sure that the law is, not racially discriminatory. Even if a jurisdiction is only partially covered by Sectioft5, congressional and state legislative redistricting Plans for the entire state must he submitted for review. Most juyisdictions submit voting changes to the I)0J which has sixty days. to review and decide either that a given change is not discriminatory and approve or "preclear" it or that the change is (lisGriminatory and disapprove or "object to" it. The states covered entirely under Section 5 are: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona. Georgia, Louisiana, MississippLSouth Carolina,Texas, and

 Virginia. States of which only certain counties or towns are covered under Section 5 are: Arizona, California, Florida, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina, and South Dakota. .

The l)0j welcomes the participation of individuals and community groups diriig the Section 5 irocess Yourgoal should be to assist the I)0J in making a decision and your comments should include your perspective on the facts leading to the creation of the proposed redistricting plan. Your letter should be addressed to Chief, Voting Section, Civil Rights Division, Department OfJUStiCe, 13.0

Washington, I).C. 20035-6128.The envelope and first page should he marked "Comment under Section 5." Also, you may call the 1)0,1 with your comments at: 1-800-253 )-3931 or: 202307-2385 or arrange to meet with the Department to discuss the proposed plan. You may check the status of the l)0j's review by visiting the' Voting Section's wellsite at: www.uscloi.tov/crt/voting/nidex.htm After the I)0J has made its determination, you should receive a copy f the decision if yoti participated.

It may be beneficial for you to seek the assistance of experts-a demographer, historian, or political scientistwho can help you in collecting and developing the information you will need (luring the redistricting process. A deniographer uses-census data to draw or redraw redistricting maps and can analyze the proposed r€clistric1ing plans and create alternative plans on your behalf. A historian will study the political and social history of your community, providing information, about race relations and the interests that all members of yourconimunity have in common. and that, th'i'efoi'e, should be respected during the redistricting process. A political scientist will analyze election information to determine voting patterns among voters, including the degree to which minority voters have an equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice. You may also wish to seek the aid of an attorney who can suggest the types of experts you need, provide advice alx)ut the redistncting process, and provide important legal arguments on your behalf in court or before the l)Oj.

Redistricting offers a chance to maintain or alter the political dynanuc on elected bodies. The right tO vote is one of the most precious rights we enjoy in this country. Participating in redistricting gives true meaning to thenght to vote by helping to create electoral plans that afford all voters an opportunity to participate in the political process. U

Todd A. Cox is an Assistant counsel with the Washington, I). C. office of NAACP Legal Defense and Edit catioh al Fund. For ;no'e information about its political participation program orto request copies ofpuhlications, call.,
Lillian Smith Book Awards

Each year, the Southern Regional Council hosts the Lillian Smith Book A wards in honor oft/ic' most liberal and outspoken of white mid-twentieth ce;ituiy Southern writers. In works such as Strange Fruit (1941) and Killers of the Dream (1949) Lillian Smith wrote boldly on issues of social and rae/a/justice, calling persistently foran end to segregation. The Smith A wards honor authors today who, through their writing, carry on Sin it/i's legacy of il/iOn mating the condition of racial andsocial inequity Gild proposing a rision ofjustice and /nnnan understanding.

The 2001 Smith Awards honored Me works of four

writers. Pam Durban thceii'ed the fiction aua;'d for So Far

Back (New York: Picador USA, 2000)

Natas/ia Trethewey received the poetly award for I )omest ic \\ork (Saint Paul: Crayiuolf Press, 2000). Hat Ll'!) icthicr iccen 'cdt/ic non-fiction award to)' Cathedrals olhudz.n: j\ l'rsoiial I.aiidscape of the South (Ilatoo

Rouge: Louisiana State University

Press, 2000). Robert P. Il/uses cmceired (1 special lifetime achierement award, rrcogni2ing his years of ciii! rig/its service in the Mississippi Delta (i/id Boston as well is has hook, co

authored with Charles H. Cihh, Radi

cal Equations: Math Literacy and Civil Rights (Boston: Beacon Press 200]). /o/lmmu'iiig are excerpts from Durham Treihewey, and Cr0 ut/icr's acceptance speeches and (1 rcuiew of hoses and Co/mb s Radical kqurtions

So Far Back

I_il/ian Sni it/i Rook ,-I wards juror

Pegram Harrison introduces Pam Durban:

In So Far Back. Pam got the history (/f Charleston, its

architecture, its mores, the names of its people,jusl right. She-also got "just right" the complex, painful, horrific relationship that existed then and now amongblacks and whites in that particular part of the world. She presents it sensitiv9y, eloquently, and in such a way that you feel that there may be sonic 1101)( 401- us after all. She says she didn't set forth to include a moral in her hook that all she did was follow her characters as far as they took her. Well, I think that the fact that her characters took her as far as they did

suggests that her profoundly insightful presentation of hose tragic relationships emerged froni her innate thecencv and sensitivity. Her book is elegiac, gi'acefuE atinospheric, and eIeguit. It raises issues that we deal with today. \Ve are fort i mate to have Pain I )o rban use her powers of fict iouIo help us understand on i' complex frightening past.  -

Pam Durban:

For a short time in the early 1970s. I lived on a plantation oil the I"slisto River south of Cliarleston.ihe place was

very old. I've seen it marked on a

French trading map. (hated 1698.

When I lived there, the outlines of that older World were still visible: the big house on the 'river bluff, Surrounded by live oaks; the shape of rice fields 'still sketched in the hiiarslies; a row of falling down hacks back in the pines.

At the tin a-', thi€' ipo rtance of that place. usnleaning as anything iii ore thin a world of- ease and

beauty was invisible to me. Noth-ing ill nrc education or upbringing

had taught or encoura'd me to see or to undersiand it as anything other than the setting of the great Southern romance of the past. Growing tip in the South in the ifihOs. I'd been raised on stories in which it seemed to me that we white Southerners were the only ones who had lived there. And so I grew tip blind and I grew U inno

cent of the larger story of Southern historc. But I write in part to discover what I know and so I wrote So FarBack to explore and question the stories about the Southern past in which I was raised. Those stories and the innocence they often insist on, are the source of the inherited blindness of nostalgia which for so long has shaped the history of the South as it has been past clown by generations of white Southerners.

I did research in all of the niajorSouthern archives-in the South Carohiniana Library, the South Carolina Historical.Society, anti theSotithern Historical CoIlecton in Chapel
1-1111. I was glad to find the stories there in those primary sources, reach beyond the nostalgia, in a million pieces. It is there in letters, diaries, newspapers, magazines, books of law, and books of architecture. Then I had to research into myself to see if l could imagine the past without nostalgia and I found that it was hard work. I saw how ingrained those attitudes were about race and history and how easily I could find and warni to them.

I set the novel in Charleston and the surrounding countryside because that place feels to me like the center of the slaehoIding world and the place where white South Carolina's idea of itself was planted and grew and flourished. My intention was to bring to life that world and the world of the city of Charleston in order to question its

assumptions and to trace the influence of its attitudes and opinions down to the present time. I did this not to refute or to deny what I found but to widen my sense of the South's history beyond the romance on which I was raised in order to understand my people's part in creating the story that we black people and white people have lived together for so long. In a way I wrote this hook with my character Louisa's resolve not to hand the story on unchanged. It seems to me that it is necessary to know and to acknowledge th part we play in things because, by acknowledging who you are and what you have done, you break down the belief in-your own innocence and that is a healing act.

Domestic Work

Lillian Smith Awards Jury Chair Patricia l)erian presented the Smith poety award to Natasha Trethewey:

 Natasha Trethewey was born in Gulfport, Mississippi and attended Atlanta schools. She is the daughter of a poet and a very early reader. Natasha is the future of writing fulfilled and is nowan assistant professor at Emory.

Her book is not only beautiful looking, but it is filled with beautiful, wonderful poems, just really spectacular.

Drapery Factory, Gulfport, Mississippi, 1956

She made the till) daily, though later she would not remember how far to tell the grandchildrenBetter that way. She could keep those miles a -secret, and her black face and black hands, and the pink bottoms of her black feet a minor inconvenience.

She does remember the men she worked for, and that often she sat side by side with white women, all of them bent over, pushing into the hum of the machines, their right calves tensed against the pedals.

Her lips tighten speaking of quitting time when the colore( women filed out slowly to have their purses checked: the insides laid open and exposed by the boss's hand.

But then she laughs when she recalls the soiled Kotex she saved, stuffed into hag 'in her purse, and Adam's look on one white man's face, his hand deep in knowledge.

-Natasha Trethewey

NatashaTrethevrey:

My parents met at Kentucky State College. My father was a poor white boy from Canada who wanted to go to college and got out a guide to American colleges and universities and picked a really cheap one where he could get a track scholarship. So, he rode the bus and hitchhiked all the way down from Halifax. Nova-Scotia, and ended up at an historically all-black college, very surprised. But he stayed and there he met my mother.

Because! wasgoing to grow up both black and mixedrace in the South, my father always told me that I had something to say, that I had stories that needed to be told However, some time ago when I was in graduate school, I was told that I was too concerned with my message to write real poetry. In that staternentwas imbèdded the idea that a message had no place in a poem. Perhaps what was meant also had something to do with the kind of subjects deemed appropriate: social justice and universal understanding not amongtheni, being, too political.

Like any writer, I love words, the sound of them, the way that they feel in my mouth when I speak them. The way that figurative language can make the mind leap to a new apprehension of things. But I have always been more concerned with people than with words. Poet Phil Levine has said, "In my ideal poem, nodeal words are noticed. You look-through them into a vision of people." Levine's is a vision that reminds us that words are not mere playthings,
nor are they pure SoUIl(l. di

vorced easily

from t,eir

meaning and

power. We

know all too well the weight they .carry. I ant honored then

most to be recognized for

using them

not only iii the

service of art, but also in the SerVice of justice and under

standing. -

Cathedrals of Kudzu

Pegram Harrison introduced non-fiction winner 1-Jal Crou'ther:

Hal Crowther, author of'Cathedrals of Kudzu, is a

journalist and an essayist. E.B. White said, "An essayist can pull on any sort of shirt, he any sort of person, according to his mood or his subject matter. He can be a philosopher, a scold, ajester, a raconteur, a competent, a pundit, a devil's advocate, and an enthusiast." Hal ('rowther wears all these shirts and more. His essays are carefully constructed. The

are of a piece. They are finely writtn. His writing's often lyric and often acerbic. 11 is always analytic. It is always

I incisive. He rejoices in spotting unclothed emperors. He gives unstinting praise where it is due. He enshrines with all their warts and faults some of his favorite authors such \as James Dickev, \Valkcr.Percv, and Cormac McCarthy, 'id his other heroes, Judge Frank Johnson and Doc Watson. And he sings lovely songs to that god-given quintet: trees, drinking, dogs, poetry, and Southern belles. He deplores and excoriates racisn. And he takes a lick at nostalgia and the myth of the old South. We are richer for his profound insightsand skilled presentation.

Hal Crowther:

H.L. Mencken said once that. his writing was "free-Of moral purpose. I am never much interested in the effects of what I write. I livein a deliberate vacuum."That is exactly the opposite of my attitude toward my work. I have never

written a word without that stump preacher's prayer that everyone who reads it will see the light and accept the spirit, When I look at the list of past winners of the Smith Award, I see a lot of my friends and also my idols and role models. Several, like Denise Giaidina, Will Campbell, and John Lgerton, are both. I always thought of myself as a kind of an Alticus Finch, a careful small town liberal who might risk tar and feathers for principle to do the right thing, but who iskind of uncomfortable when he sees men sitting in church without neckties, -

\Vhit I love aldut Southern liberals, epitomized by the SRC, is that they iire practical, hardworking, no-non _-,eiisc liberals and the' have had to be. Down here, people cunimuted to pr )g

and justi.e had real clragon to slav and real crosses to bear. They didn't waste their time orienergv on the nitpicking and backbiting that provides the Rush I_imbaugh's of this world with easy caricatures of liberals. Down here, our liberals wart your heart and your vote. 'lhev (loot want to prune your vocabulary. Liberals are a minnritv in this country. We can't afford to squander out-, capital on the Lilliputian language wars. We can't afford-to appear petly or ridiculous.  U

The 2002 Lillian. Smith Rook A wards will be held ou October 18,2002 at the Sheraton Colony Square in Atlanta. For more information, visit: uc.southernicilorg/coiiiiii

si)ith.html.

"Drapkry Fact ory, Cu lfp () it, Mississippi, 1956" Copy- right 2000 by N a t a s ii a Tretliewey. Reprinted from 1) 0 in e st c Work with tli e permission of Graywoif Press, St. Paul. Minnesota.
REVIEWS

Radical Gift

Robert P. Moses and Charles B. Cobb, Jr.. Radical

Equations: Math Literacy and Civil Rights. Boston: Beacon Piless. 2001. With a foreword by David I)ennis.

Reviewed bvi. Todd Move

YOU niav tint know it, but as you read this Flia Baker.

I\iiizi (' \I ooi-e, and lann le Lou -i-lanier are te kids to use complex graph jug calculators in Canibridge, Massachusetts: Indianola, Mississippi: and Chicago. Illinois.

\\elh . .1101 quite. But Bob Moses

and Dave l)ennis, veterans, of the

.1ississi)pi Civil Rights Movement

of t lie 1960s, have used the organiz

ing techniques and concepts they learned from Baker, I-lamer, Moore, and others to teach lessons in math and citizenship 1(1 more than 4(1001) o nderserved schoolchildren. l ii eir Algebfa Project is a cot ii mu n i lvorganizing effort disguised as a school re fort ii program.

In Radical Equations: Math Lit

('racy and Ciii! Rights, Moses and

Cli arIes Cobb tell the story of the Algebra Projects development and relate its early successes. They nvike

a compelling case that the stakes are just as high for die sclioolchildft'n who are being "tracked" out of advadced math classes today as they were for the Mississippi sharecroppers who were until recently (jellied the right to vote. And,, they argne, the changes that the Algebra Project organizing can produce will be_just as revolutionary as the changes wrought by voter registration organizing have been since the 1960s.

The Algebra Project began quite by accident in 192

when Moses asked his daughter's eighth-grade math

teacher if she could begin a more advanced program of study. The teacher-responded by asking Moses to coiìie in and teach algebra himself. (The request w'isn't as crazy as it might seem. Moses had taught mathematics at the elite I -brace Mann School in Manhattan before the Civil Rights

Movement took him to Mississippi, and in 1982 he was the recipient of a MacArthur Foundation "genius" award and a Ph.D. candidate at Harvard.) The lirst thing Moses noticed was that the classroom-in the progressive Martin Luther King,,! r., School in Cambridge, no less-was skewed along racial and class lines. Upper-middle-class white students were doing advanced math and a mixture Of white students and children of color, all middle-class, performed at grade

level. A third group 01 nimonty stuclerts and working-class whites was being taught remedial ninth. Moses began searching for ways to show all students that tlidy could expect more of themselves

Because Moses was "really a parent-organizer as much as a teacher," he could he creative in his methods. Since then, he u1-his stu

dents in the Algebra Project have

developed a truly innovative cumcu

urn and spread the project into (lOZ

ens ofinner-city and rural school dis-trict's throughout the country. (Dave

I )ennis heads the Southern Initiative of the Algebra Project.)

When students begin the Alge-bra Project curriculumthe emphasis seems to be on teaching basic algeI) ra concepts that will open doors to

more advanced study. As an educa-tional

reform the jirograni relies heavily oil experiential

learning and youth cult tire. Students go on held trips intro

ducing them to concrete examples of the mathematical

concepts they study, and then convince other kids that it's cool to learn math. Older studentsteach algebra to younger students, and all learn. On this level alone the Algebra Project has been wildly successful.

Math test scores have increased draniaticlly in neailv -every school system that has embraced the prograni, but that is not how Moses measures the Algebra Project's success. The key transformation occurs, he says, not when more students startlearning more advanced mathematical concepts hut when sludentsbegin organizing2mnd demanding equal access to educational opportunities. "Lven the development of some sterling new I mathematics I
curriculum-a real breakthrough-would not make us happy if it (lid not empower the target poptilation to demand access to literacy for eVeryone." Moses claims.

11w Algebra Project's underlying plulosophy

lar to the one that motivated Moses' Student N)fl-ViOlefl1

Coordinating Committee (SNCC) four decades ago. In or

der to create real change, he writes, young people "have to

demand what everyone says they don't want"-just as sharecroppers had to demand the right to vote. And just as Blacks demanding and attaining the right to vote changed southern society a generation ago. Moses thinks, middle school students demanding and attaining equal access to

math literacy will ch angc America in

the 21st century.

Bob Moses served as SNCC's Mississippi field director and embodied the organization's motto "Let the People Decide." He may have been the most un-leaderlv leader of any social movement in American history, which somehow made him all the more charismatic. Moses' SNCC colleagues in Mississippi would have walked through walls forhim, and the power thathe convinced local people to find in themselves waslilerally overwhelfning. After SNCC imploded, Moses moved with his family to Tanzania, where lie worked for Julius Nvereres Ministry of Lducation. For the most part he staved out of the public eye even after returning to the I nited States in 1976, until the Alge

bra Project again thrusthirn into community organizing.

Radical Equations includes a long section of Moses'

meditations on the Mississippi movement of the 1960s. Students of the movement have been pining for Moses' memoirs for a long time, and this may 1k the closest they ever come to reading them. This-aspect of the hook does not disappoint: Moses and Cobb seen incapable of composing a sentence about the Civil Rights Movement that

 oes not include a piercing insight. "One of the valuable lessons of the Southern Civil Rights Movement is that you have to shake free of other people's definitions of who you are and what you are willing and able to (10," they write, and this lesson clearly informs all aspects oftheAlgebra Project.

- Charles Cobb, it must be said, is uniquely qualified to

co-write this book. In 1962 when Cobb was a student at

Howard University, he hopped on a bus bound fora CORE

workshop on nonviolent direct action in Houston. On a

stopover in Jackson, Mississippi. he got off the bus, and

found the local SNCC Office. "How conic you're going to

Texas for a civil rights conference when you re right here

in-Mississippi lwhere all the action isi?" Tougaloo College student Lawrence Guyot asked. Guvot regaled Coblcwith Soi-ies of SNCC's ioter registration efforts in the Deltaand theviolent white responses they produced-and Cobb washooked. Muses moved him to Ruleville, Mississippi, iii the heart of the Delta, to register voters that fall.

By 1961 Cobb had diagnosed the undrrlving disease

that-affected the uneducated and disfranchised Black share

croppers of Mississippi: -they lived-in a culture that told

them repeatedly that they did not deserve a decent education, that they had no reason to want to vote. What they needed was an alternative culture that would allow them to

- define tlieniselves. Cobb suggested that SNCC help the Black people of Mississippi create their on 'ducational institutions so they could decide fur themselves what thev were Capable of doing. This developing culture manifested itself most beautfuI1y in 1961 with the creation of the Freedom Schools. 1'\o one individual was responsible for the idea of the Freedom Schools, but Cobb deserves a great deal of the credit. That spirit is clearly alive in the Algebra Projec.

Moses is convinced that math literacy can be a a organizing tool for education and economic access in the newcent ury just asvoter registration was for political access in the 1960s. We can only hope he is right. According to Depart nen of Labor stO

t-istics, by 2010 er'ey American job

will 'require significant technological skills. Hundreds of

thousands of st'hoolchiilclren in America's poor-and Black

Con)niunities simply are not heinprepared to compete for -

those positions. Jobs that require computer liericv already pay at least 15 percent more than those-tiiat do not, and the ap will surely widen in the coming decades.

Across America, low expectations for certain children are ensuring that -high-paying careers will never he available to them unless school systems radically change the way they teach math and relate to students. Moses believes that "the absence of math literacy in urban and rural communities is in issue as urgent as the lack of black registered voters was in Mississippi in 1961." head this hook, and you will agree. In several yearswe may consider Radical Equations, equal parts memoir and manifesto, the most important civil rights book of the new century.

J. Todd Moye is the director of the National Bark Service's Tuskegee Airmen Oral History Project.
Recurring -Deaths

Ran(Iolf)1i I oiiev. A flreaiii of the la/treed ilau: St0

11(5 learn (etogia flea/h Ran. (;raid IaI)ids: Will. I Irdsin:iiis Fuhlisliiog Company, hhl. With a foreword by Will D. Callipbell.

Reviewed by Brenda Anderson

In :1 J)rarn itt I/ic fat/reed ;lan, Randolph lAmey

meds light on what ins l)e'fl a dark and abandoned ghetto

in our crinimal justic' system today: death row. Lonev's

hook isit stimngaccount olwhat Ia' has witnessed ;is a frequent

visitor Georgia's death row.

He unlocks the gate to the realOn lernea di on rsu perici al

tin- penalty

through his experiencesvisiling

death !o\\ uinmates in the Gebrgia I )iagni s1 ic and ( lassi Iic tion Prison near Jackson. I A)nev a Ii)eral minister and social activist who lives in rural (;€'oi-gia, break'the harrier oil]- society enclose'arou 11(1 ci) OVi Cte( I Cii iii Iii als ha giving 115 ui OppOuntV to get to know the hu maK behind the criminal, something that otherwise our society would sadly OV( i look. I iv writing about the reinioiihips with his friends on (heath OW, I oflev gives a Voice to a deeper side of the story that is on fortunately suppressed and ignored. hito, hooks title is taken from I mcv's recurring dream In liii which lie feels the ''tattered man that appears I it is a reflection of himself. I onev views the

tat ten' d man as an in ncr darkness in him and as repr 'senting feelings of shame. He expresses his fril 1.1"t rat loll and shame with the death penalty system that we, as a society, embrace. Aside from the brutality behind the death penally, l.onev argues that the death penalty is unfairly applied, only targeting the powerless. Loneys seriousness iid dedication in providing the weak with,suppo!i is cvi(I it ill his commitment to Grs)rgia's death row inmates. lie stresses the need for embracing the "least" of those in

)ii r coinniu nities. instead of ex(cuting them.

'through his b mk , I uiev sliues his experiences as a

witness to the culmination of years of societal, racial, and

systematic repression and abuse. stories of death row

in mates that reach fu' back, ofteft d 'scribing a childhood

han n ted by consistent abuse and ti-alma, illustrate the tragic lives these individual-, experienced long before they were involved in crime. He walks us thi'ough the lives of the convicted before they fell to Crime. The cases present how a negative e nviro ii men t at an earL' age can affect people enormously, Critically affecting their behavior and (lecision-niaking as adults. l.onev stressr's the importance of recognizing the critical role that tratilliatic events III Childhood could play in a persons responsive behavior.

As I >miey deiiionstrates

in liii.' stories he shares of the

lilen 00 death row, the men's pasts 11(1(1 overwhelming cii'Cu I nslan ci's out o t their control that mevitahiv affected them negatively. I oney invites the render into his chose friendships and expresses the (led) ties he shares with these men. lhev become t'elationships that hurt when his Iniends are finally executed. :\s painful and depi'essing as his role becomes, he shares with the reader his struggle to continue being a witness and he irn about the ye i-v people our state kills hut knows almost nothing about. 1,1)0ev gives Voice to t hi 'ii' liiiinanity and presents it with a

version of capital punishment

that the system fails to ackm o iwledgc . lie adds c it or and dimension to our black and white, Ofl ('-di lii ('ii 5i( iiial pci-i'eptioim of what the death penill tv entails.

'rome Bowden was one ofthese im'n 1)11 death iow

who made a tremendous impact on 1.4)11ev. In 1986, 1 .4)11(,y

was distraught at knowing that all efforts to plea to]- a

ck'nu'ncy had not been enough to save Howden from his scheduled execution. honey had hoped that by presenting liowdi'n's tin forlunate life story to Georgia's Board of Par.(Ions and Paroles, they would have showed mercy and commuted the death sentence to a term of tile in prison. Ills efforts were, however, unsuccessful in preventing the
execution. Loney describes Bowden's childhood and the unlucky circumstances tinder which lie got charged with murder. He states that ever since Bowden was a child, his mother knew that he was psychologically incapacitated. At the age of fourteen, a clinical psychologist diagnosed him as being "definitely retarded." Bowden was black and poor; he grew up in a segregated community and was subject to discrimination based on his race and mental illness. Under his circumstances. Bowden never received the help he needed. As Loney explains Jerome Bowden's case, he expresses the sadness and disappointment of. realizing how our society once again failed Bowden in condemning him for a crime in which there was significant doubt to his guilt. The loss of this great individual was devastating to Loney Yet, it offered him strength and a sense of hope, as Bowden not only left a mark in Loney's heart, but in the courts as well. In response to Bowden's tragic execution, in 1988, the Georgia legislature barred future juries from giving death sentences to the mentally ill.

Along with Bowden's case, Loney narrates valuable stories of other men on death row that are very meaningful to him. By sharing a personal letter written after the execution of a clear friend, Loncy tries to come to terms with the death of his close friend of many years. Coming to terms with our criminal justice system and realizing his important role in it, Loney has been deeply affected by the relationships lie built with these men. Reading Loney's stories of death row will leave the reader concernectabout our ideals injustice and their true ramifications in a society more and more obsessed with poetic justice. Lorley points to an important facet of the criminal justice system that has been ignore( for too long. Who are we killing? And what is our role in the process? Society alienates and clehumanizes those whom our state condemns to (tie. Randolph Loneybriclges the gap and brings us face to face with the ultimate punishment we brutally inflict upon ourselves. IA)ney's touching account will broaden the reader's under: standing of what our death penalty system really means and will hell) the reader realize the discriminatory flaws deeply embedded in the system.

Brenda Anderson is a history major at Yale University in hersenior year. Originally from Laredo. Texas, Anderson plans to attend law school.

Justice Under Law

Frank M. Johnson, Defending Constitutional Right, Edited by Tony A Freye, Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2001. .

Reviewed by Jack Bass

In this slender volume, Tony Freyer, characterizes Judge Frank M. Johnson, Jr. as "a unique figure in American history" and provides a useful collection of Johnson's own articles, articulating his vision ofjustice ha'sed on law. This collection augments four biographies (one by this reviewer) of a federal trial judge unsurpassed in his impact for shaping Constitutional principles and expanding the civil rights of all Americans.

"lfltellectual acuity conditioned by life experience shaped Johnson's attitude toward the constitutional law governing race relations," Freyer wtites. Alabama Gov. George Wallace once declared that Johnson needed "a barbed wire enema. In contrast. Martin Luther King, Jr. asserted that Johnson "gave true meaning to the word 'justice." When Johnson died, his obituary in The New York Times filled an entire page.

Freyer, a University of Alabama law professor and legal historian, describes how as a trial judge from 1955 to 1979 Johnson "decided many of the most significant cas,es in American constitutional history" Their social impact, such as his order allowing the dramatic march from Selma to Montgomery that created the climate in 1965 for passage of the Voting Rights Act, helped transform the American South.

The book begins with ;in introduction oil ".Johnson'-, Unusual Origins and Early Career." Nothing shaped him more than growing up III the Appalachian foothills of Vinston County, the county in Alabama that, before the Civil War, grew the least amount of cotton and contained
the fewest number of slaves. Unionists prevailed in the "free state of Winston, where twice a's many men-including two (>!jOhilsoils great-grandfathers b1)thers-f ought for the United States Army as for the Confederacy. Johnson's father was a "mountain Republican," the only member of that party to serve in the 20th century Alabama legislature until file 1960s. He attended Republican national conventions and became Inencllv with such men as Herbert Brownell and Warren Burger, who in the Lisenhower I)epartnient of justice would play the key

roles in selecting federal judges.

\\iiat follows is the full transcript of the historically significant two-hour ITS interview of Johnson in 1980 by Bill Moyers and then eight articles on a range of subjects written by Johnson, each preceded by a historical overview by Frever. He contends in his conclusion that Johnson's rationale "for what others (](,sell be(] as boundless judicial activism was fu ndainentallv conservative." joluisons core values, he says, rested "on basic equality under law and equality of opportunity.

For Johnson, the Constitution and its Bill of Rights created "a

brand of individual Ii bertv char-acterized by the fundamental

right t C) personal security, opportuitity. citizenship, and freedoni of expression and Conscience.'

'The value of this hook is to

provide access to Frank

Johnson expressing these core beliefs in his own wordsthe full expression of his philosophical analysis of what constitutes justice. under law. The articles range over a quarter of a century, from 19Gb on the roles of the attorney and the judiciary to the importance of equal access to justice and finally, in 1990, on "What is Right with America."

 One unfortunate omission is J1ofl's 1979 commencement speech at Boston University 12w School, which was published in the Enioiy Law Journal in 1979 as "In Defense of Judicial Activism," In this full response to critics such as Robert l3ork, Johnson called for "an appreciation of the meaning of judicial activism," He directly, challenged the widely held legal doctrine of "neutral principles." expressing his view fhat "the doctrine of neutral principles robs the Constitution of its vitality. It freezes

constitutional thinking in the interests of theoretical purity. 'flie Framers were pragmatic men and the Constitution is a practical blueprint: its genius lies in its generality. Perfect logical consistency has always given way to practical distinction. As well it should.

"If the law should beware unprincipled distinctions, it should also beware insufficient inconsistency. Religious differences, race differences, sex tkfferences, age differences, and political differences are not the same. It is no mark of intellectual soundness to treat them as if they

were. Moreover, if the life of the law has been experience. then the law should be realistic enough to treat certain issues as special: as racism is special in American history. A judiciary that cannot declare that is of little value,"

He emphasized, "It is one

thing for a judge to adopt a theory of political morality because it is his own: it is another for him to exercise his judgment about what the' political morality implied h the Constitution is." The general language of the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the Civil War amend nients (the Thirteenth, Fotirtent 11, an

Fifteenth amendments) he asserted, appeals ,"not to a particular conception of necessity or reason or equality but to the concepts themselves." (Italics in original)

For readers interested ill

engaging a great mind at work, Defending Constitutional

Rig/its provides a opportunity to develop an understanding of what is required to create justice under law. U

Dr. Jack Bass- is professor of humanities and social sciences at the College of Charleston. He is the author of Taming the StormThe Life and Times ofJudge Frank M. Johnson Jr., and theSouth 's Fight over Civil Rights, which' won the 1994 Robert Kennedy Book Award grand prize, and author or co-author of six other hooks about civil rig/its and political change in the 20th century South.
